===== PAGE 1 =====
Traditional 
Knowledge and 
Intellectual 
Property
Background Brief
No. 1

===== PAGE 2 =====
1The current international system for protecting intellectual property was 
fashioned during the age of enlightenment and industrialization and developed 
subsequently in line with the perceived needs of technologically advanced 
societies. However, in recent years, indigenous peoples, local communities, 
and governments, mainly in developing countries, have demanded equivalent 
protection for traditional knowledge. WIPO member states take part in 
negotiations within the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual 
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC), 
in order to develop an international legal instrument (or instruments) that 
would give traditional knowledge, genetic resources and traditional cultural 
expressions (folklore) effective protection. Such an instrument could range 
from a recommendation to WIPO members to a formal treaty that would 
bind countries choosing to ratify it. Representatives of indigenous and local 
communities are assisted by the WIPO Voluntary Fund to attend the WIPO 
talks, and their active participation is crucial for a successful outcome. 
Background Brief No. 2 The WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual 
Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore is 
available at www.wipo.int/publications/en/details.jsp?id=4682&plang=EN .
Traditional knowledge is not so-called because of its antiquity. It is a living body 
of knowledge that is developed, sustained and passed on from generation to 
generation within a community, often forming part of its cultural or spiritual 
identity. As such, it is not easily protected by the current intellectual property 
system, which typically grants protection for a limited period to new inventions 
and original works by individuals or companies. Its living nature also means that 
“traditional” knowledge is not easy to define.
Recognizing traditional forms of creativity and innovation as protectable 
intellectual property may enable indigenous and local communities as well as 
governments to have a say over their use by others. This may make it possible, 
for example, to protect traditional remedies, artworks or music against 
misappropriation, and enable communities to control and benefit collectively 
from their commercial exploitation.
Although the negotiations underway in WIPO are propelled mainly by developing 
countries, they are not neatly divided along “North-South” lines. Communities 
and governments do not necessarily share the same views, and some developed 
country governments, especially those with indigenous populations, are active.

===== PAGE 3 =====
2 Two angles to intellectual property protection exist:
 – Defensive protection aims to stop people outside the community from 
acquiring intellectual property rights over traditional knowledge. India, for 
example, has compiled a searchable database of traditional medicine that can 
be used as evidence of prior art by patent examiners when assessing patent 
applications. This database was created following a well-known case in which 
the US Patent and Trademark Office had granted a patent (later revoked) 
for the use of turmeric to treat wounds, a property well known to traditional 
communities in India and documented in ancient Sanskrit texts. Defensive 
strategies might also be used to protect sacred cultural manifestations, 
such as sacred symbols or words, from being registered as trademarks by 
third parties.
 – Positive protection is the granting and exercise of rights that empower 
communities to promote their traditional knowledge, control its uses and 
benefit from its commercial exploitation. This can be achieved through the 
existing intellectual property system, and a number of countries have also 
developed specific legislation. However, any specific protection afforded 
under national law may not hold for other countries, one reason why many 
are advocating for an international legal instrument.
WIPO’s work on traditional knowledge addresses three distinct yet related areas: 
traditional knowledge in the strict sense (technical know-how, practices, skills, 
and innovations related to, say, biodiversity, agriculture or health); traditional 
cultural expressions/expressions of folklore (cultural manifestations such 
as music, art, designs, symbols and performances); and genetic resources 
(genetic material of actual or potential value found in plants, animals and 
micro-organisms). 
Although for many communities traditional knowledge, genetic resources 
and traditional cultural expressions form part of a single integrated heritage, 
from an intellectual property standpoint they raise different questions and 
may require different sets of solutions. In all three areas, in addition to work 
on an international legal instrument, WIPO is responding to requests from 
communities and governments for practical assistance and technical advice on 
how to make more effective use of existing intellectual property systems and 
to participate more effectively in the IGC’s negotiations. WIPO’s work includes 
assistance to develop and strengthen national and regional systems for the 
protection of traditional knowledge (policies, laws, information systems and 
practical tools) and other capacity-building initiatives.

===== PAGE 4 =====
3Traditional knowledge
When community members innovate within the traditional knowledge 
framework, they may use the patent system to protect their innovations. 
However, traditional knowledge as such – knowledge that has ancient roots and 
is often informal and oral – is not protected by conventional intellectual property 
systems. This has prompted some countries to develop their own sui generis 
(specific, special) systems for protecting traditional knowledge, based on the 
kinds of measures, principles and values that make up comprise the intellectual 
property system. For more information on national policy and legislative options, 
see Background Brief No. 3 Developing a National Strategy on IP and TK, TCEs 
and GRs, available at www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_tk_3.pdf . 
There are also many initiatives underway to document traditional knowledge. 
In most cases the motive is to preserve or disseminate it, or to use it, for 
example, in environmental management, rather than for the purpose of 
intellectual property protection. There are nevertheless concerns that if 
documentation makes traditional knowledge widely available, especially if it 
can be accessed on the Internet, this could lead to misappropriation and use in 
ways that were not intended by its holders. 
At the same time, documentation can help protect traditional knowledge, for 
example, by providing a confidential record reserved for the community only. 
Some formal documentation and registries of traditional knowledge support 
sui generis protection systems, while databases – such as India’s database on 
traditional medicine – play a role in defensive protection within the existing 
intellectual property system. It is important to ensure that documentation 
of traditional knowledge is linked to an intellectual property strategy and 
does not take place in a policy or legal vacuum. For more information on 
documentation, please see Background Brief no 9 Documentation of  
Traditional Knowledge and Traditional Cultural Expressions, available at  
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_tk_9.pdf .
Traditional cultural expressions
Traditional cultural expressions (folklore) are seen as integral to the cultural and 
social identities of indigenous and local communities, embodying know-how 
and skills, and transmitting core values and beliefs. Protecting folklore may 
contribute to economic development, encourage cultural diversity and help 
preserve cultural heritage.

===== PAGE 5 =====
4 Traditional cultural expressions can be protected by existing systems, such as 
copyright and related rights, geographical indications, trademarks and designs. 
For example, contemporary adaptations of folklore may be copyrightable, while 
performances of traditional music, dance or theater may come under the WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty or the Beijing Treaty on Audiovisual 
Performances. Trademarks can be used to identify authentic indigenous 
arts, as the Maori Arts Board in New Zealand, Te Waka Toi, has done. Some 
countries also have special legislation for the protection of folklore. Panama 
has established a registration system for traditional cultural expressions, 
while the Pacific Regional Framework for the Protection of Traditional 
Knowledge and Expressions of Culture gives “traditional owners” the right to 
authorize or prevent use of folklore and receive a share of the benefits from 
commercial exploitation.
Genetic resources
Genetic resources themselves are generally not considered “intellectual 
property” (they are not creations of the human mind). In considering the 
intellectual property aspects of the use of genetic resources, WIPO’s work 
complements the international legal framework that regulates the access to, 
and the sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources 
defined by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), and its Nagoya 
Protocol, and the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and 
Agriculture of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 
Inventions based on or developed using genetic resources (associated with 
traditional knowledge or not) may be patentable or protected by plant 
breeders’ rights. Some are concerned about patents being granted over 
such inventions, which do not fulfill the existing patentability requirements 
of novelty and inventiveness. To help patent examiners find relevant prior 
art and avoid the granting of patents in error, proposals have been made 
to set up genetic resources and traditional knowledge databases, and 
WIPO has improved its own search tools and patent classification systems. 
More controversially, some wish to have the possibility to disqualify patent 
applications that do not comply with CBD obligations on prior informed 
consent, mutually agreed terms, fair and equitable benefit-sharing, and 
disclosure of origin. A number of countries have enacted domestic legislation 
putting into effect these obligations and WIPO members are considering 
whether, and to what extent, the intellectual property system should be used 
to support them. Many, but not all, WIPO members want to make it mandatory

===== PAGE 6 =====
5for patent applications to show the source or origin of genetic resources, as 
well as evidence of prior informed consent and a benefit sharing agreement.
Developing an international legal instrument
Because the existing international intellectual property system does not fully 
protect traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, discussions 
are underway to develop an international legal instrument providing sui generis 
protection. 
An international legal instrument would define what is meant by traditional 
knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, who the rights holders would 
be, how competing claims by communities would be resolved, and what rights 
and exceptions ought to apply. 
In the WIPO negotiations, many argue that use of traditional knowledge ought 
to be subject to free, prior and informed consent, especially for sacred and 
secret materials. However, others fear that granting exclusive control over 
traditional cultures could stifle innovation, diminish the public domain and be 
difficult to implement in practice. 
Working out the details is complex and there are divergent views on the 
best ways forward, including whether intellectual property-type rights are 
appropriate for protecting traditional forms of innovation and creativity. 
To take just one example, communities may wish to control all uses of their 
traditional cultural expressions, including works inspired by them, even if they 
are not direct copies. Copyright law, on the other hand, permits building on the 
works of others, provided there is sufficient originality in the new creations. 
The text of the legal instrument will have to draw the line between legitimate 
borrowing and unauthorized appropriation. 
On genetic resources, countries agree that intellectual property protection 
and the conservation of biodiversity should be mutually supportive, but differ 
on how this can be achieved and whether any changes to current intellectual 
property rules are necessary.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Further information
WIPO Report on Fact-finding Missions on Intellectual Property and 
Traditional Knowledge (1998-1999),  
www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/tk/768/wipo_pub_768.pdf
Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge  
and Traditional Cultural Expressions: An Overview (WIPO Publication  
No. 933), www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_933_2020.pdf
Glossary of Key Terms Related to Intellectual Property and Genetic  
Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Traditional Cultural Expressions,  
www.wipo.int/tk/en/resources/glossary.html
A series of Background Briefs prepared by WIPO on various topics,  
www.wipo.int/tk/en/resources/publications.html
Database of legislative texts on the protection of traditional knowledge 
and traditional cultural expressions and legislative texts relevant to 
genetic resources, www.wipo.int/tk/en/legal_texts
The WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and 
Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC),  
www.wipo.int/tk/en/igc/index.html
More WIPO resources are available at  
www.wipo.int/tk/en/resources/publications.html
wipo.int
© WIPO, 2023 /  Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) / The CC license does not apply to non-WIPO content in this publication. 
Cover: Getty Images/James Strachan, emilio100 / WIPO Reference RN2023-5.1EN; DOI: 10.34667/tind.47852
