===== PAGE 1 =====
[SCHEDULE T] 
[See Rule 157] 
GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES FOR AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI 
MEDICINES 
The Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) are prescribed as follows in Part I and Part II to 
ensure that: 
(i) Raw materials used in the manufacture of drugs are authentic, of prescribed quality 
and are free from contamination. 
(ii) The manufacturing process is as has been prescribed to maintain the standards. 
(iii) Adequate quality control measures are adopted. 
(iv) The manufactured drug which is released for sale is of acceptable quality. 
(v) To achieve the objectives listed above, each licensee shall evolve methodology and 
procedures for following the prescribed process of manufacture of drugs which 
should be documented as a manual and kept for reference and inspection. 
However, under IMCC Act 1970 registered Vaidyas, Siddhas and Hakeems who 
prepare medicines on their own to dispense to their patients and not selling such 
drugs in the market are exempted from the purview of G.M.P. 
PART-I 
GOOD MANUFACTRING PRACTICES 
Factory Premises: 
The manufacturing plant should have adequate space for:-
(i) Receiving and storing raw material 
(ii) Manufacturing process areas 
(iii) Quality control section 
(iv) Finished goods store 
(v) Office 
(vi) Rejected goods/drugs store 
1.2 General Requirements: 
1.1(A) Location and surroundings- The factory building for manufacture of Ayurveda, 
Siddha and Unani medicines shall be so situated and shall have such 
construction as to avoid contamination from open sewerage, drain, public lavatory 
or any factory which produces disagreeable or obnoxious odour or fumes or 
excessive soot, dust or smoke. 
1.1(B) Buildings- The building used for factory shall be such as to permit production of 
drugs under hygienic conditions and shou ld be free from cobwebs and 
insects/rodents. It should have adequate provision of light and ventilation. The 
floor and the walls should not be damp or moist. The premises used for 
manufacturing, processing, packaging and labeling will be in conformity with the 
provisions of the Factory Act. It shall be located so as to be: 
(i) Compatible with other manufacturing operations that may be carried out in 
the same or adjacent premises. 
(ii) Adequately provided with working space to allow orderly and logical 
placement of equipment and materials to avoid the risk of mix- up between 
different drugs or components thereof and control the possibility of cross -
contamination by other drugs or substances and avoid the risk of omission of 
any manufacturing or control step. 
(iii) Designed, constructed and maintained to prevent entry of insects and 
rodents. Interior surface (walls, floors and ceilings) shall be smooth and free 
from cracks and permit easy cleaning and disinfection. The walls of the room

===== PAGE 2 =====
1.1(C) 
1.1(D) 
1.1(E) 
1.1(F) 
1.1(F)(A) 
in which the manufacturing operations are carried out shall be impervious to 
and be capable of being kept clean. The flooring shall be smooth and even 
and shall be such as not to permit retention or accumulation of dust or waste 
products. 
(iv) Provided with proper drainage s ystem in the processing area. The sanitary 
fittings and electrical fixtures in the manufacturing area shall be proper and 
safe. 
(v) Furnace/Bhatti section could be covered with tin roof and proper ventilation, 
but sufficient care should be taken to prevent flies and dust. 
(vi) There should be fire safety measures and proper exits should be there. 
(vii) Drying space- There should be separate space for drying of raw material, in 
process medicine or medicines which require drying before packing. This 
space will be protected from flies/insects/dusts, etc., by proper flooring, 
wiremash windows, glass pances or other material. 
Water Supply - The water used in manufacture shall be pure and of potable 
quality. Adequate provision of water for washing the premises shall be made. 
Disposal of Waste- From the manufacturing sections and laboratories the waste 
water and the residues which might be prejudicial to the workers or public health 
shall be disposed off after suitable treatment as per guidelines of pollution control 
authorities to render them harmless. 
Containers’ Cleaning - In factories where operations involving the use of 
containers such as glass bottles, vials and jars are conducted, there shall be 
adequate arrangement separated from the manufacturing operations for washing, 
cleaning and drying of such containers. 
Stores- Storage should have proper ventilation and shall be free from dampness. 
It should provide independent adequate space for storage of different types of 
material, such as raw material, packaging material and finished products. 
Raw Materials- All raw materials procured for manufacturing will be stored in the 
raw materials store. The manufacture based on the experience and the 
characteristics of theparticular raw material used in Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani 
system shall decide the use of appropriate containers which would protect the 
quality of the raw material as well as prevent it from damage due to dampness, 
microbiological contamination or rodent and in sect infestation, etc. If certain raw 
materials require such controlled environmental conditions, the raw materials 
stores may be sub- divided with proper enclosures to provide such conditions by 
suitable cabinization. While designing such containers, cabins or areas in the raw 
materials store, care may be taken to handle the following different categories of 
raw materials:-
(1) Raw material of metallic origin. 
(2) Raw material of mineral origin. 
(3) Raw material from animal source. 
(4) Fresh Herbs. 
(5) Dry Herbs or plant parts. 
(6) Excipients, etc. 
(7) Volatile oils/perfumes & flavours. 
(8) Plant concentrates/extracts and exudates/resins. 
Each container used for raw material storage shall be properly identified with the 
label which indicates n ame of the raw material, source of supply and will also 
clearly state the status of raw material such as ‘UNDER TEST’ or ‘APPROVED’ or 
‘REJECTED’. The labels shall further indicate the identity of the particular supply 
in the form of Batch No. or Lot. No. and the date of receipt of consignment. 
All the raw materials shall be sampled and got tested either by the in- house 
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani experts (Quality control technical person) or by the

===== PAGE 3 =====
laboratories approved by Government and shall be used only on approval after 
verifying. The rejected raw material should be removed from other raw materials 
store and should be kept in a separate room. Procedure of ‘First in first out’ 
should be adopted for raw materials wherever necessary. Records of the receipt , 
testing and approval or rejection and use of raw material shall be maintained. 
1.1(F)(B) Packaging Materials - All packaging materials such as bottles, jars, capsules, 
etc. shall be stored properly. All containers and closures shall be adequately 
cleaned and dried before packing the products. 
1.1(F)(C) Finished Goods Stores - The finished goods transferred from the production 
area after proper packaging shall be stored in the finished goods stores within an 
area marked “Quarantine”. After the quality cont rol laboratory and the experts 
have checked the correctness of finished goods with reference to its 
packing/labelling as well as the finished product quality as prescribed,, then it will 
be moved to ‘Approved Finished Goods Stock” area. Only approved finis hed 
goods shall be dispatched as per marketing requirements. Distribution records 
shall be maintained as required. 
If any Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug needs special storage conditions, 
finished goods store shall provide necessary environmental requirements. 
1.1(G) Working Space - The manufacturing area shall provide adequate space 
(manufacture and quality control) for orderly placement of equipment and material 
used in any of the operations for which these are employed so as to facilitate 
easy and safe working and to minimize or to eliminate any risk of mix- up between 
different drugs, raw materials and to prevent the possibility of cross-contamination 
of one drug by another drug that is manufactured, stored or handled in the same 
premises. 
1.1(H) Health, Clothing, Sanitation and Hygiene of Workers- All workers employed in 
the Factory shall be free from contagious diseases. The clothing of the workers 
shall consist of proper uniform suitable to the nature of work and the climate and 
shall be clean. The uniform shall also include cloth or synthetic covering for 
hands, feet and head wherever required. Adequate facilities for personal 
cleanliness such as clean towels, soap and scrubbing brushes shall be provided. 
Separate provision shall be made for lavato ries to be used by men and women, 
and such lavatories shall be located at places separated from the processing 
rooms. Workers will also be provided facilities for changing their clothes and to 
keep their personal belongings. 
1.1(I) Medical Services- The manufacturer shall also provide:-
(a) Adequate facilities for first aid; 
(b) Medical examination of workers at the time of employment and periodical 
check up thereafter by a physician once a year, with particular attention 
being devoted to freedom from infections. Records thereof shall be 
maintained. 
1.1(J) Machinery and Equipments - For carrying out manufacturing depending on the 
size of operation and the nature of product manufactured, suitable equipment 
either manually operated or operated semi-aut omatically (electrical or team 
based) or fully automatic machinery shall be made available. These may include 
machines for use in the process of manufacture such as crushing, grinding, 
powdering, boiling, mashing, burning, roasting,filtering, drying, filling, labeling and 
packing, etc. To ensure ease in movement of workers and orderliness in 
operations a suitably adequate space will be ensured between two machines or 
rows of machines. These machinery and equipments and machinery 
recommended is indicated in Part II- A. Proper standard operational procedures 
(SOPs) for cleaning maintaining and performance of every machine should be 
laid down.

===== PAGE 4 =====
1.1(K) Batch Manufacturing Records- The licensee shall maintain batch manufacturing 
record of each batch of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs manufactured 
irrespective of the type of product manufactured (classical preparation or patent 
and proprietary medicines). Manufacturing records are required to provide and 
account of the list of raw materials and their quantities ob tained from the store, 
tests conducted during the various stages of manufacture like taste, colour, 
physical characteristics and chemical tests as may be necessary or indicated in 
the approved books of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani mentioned in the First 
Schedule of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940). These tests my 
include any in- house or pharmacopoeial test adopted by the manufacturer in the 
raw material or in the process material and in the finished product. These records 
shall be duly signed by Production and Quality Control Personnel respectively. 
Details of transfer of manufactured drug to the finished products store including 
dates and quantity of drugs transferred along with record of testing of the finished 
product, if any, and packaging, r ecords shall be maintained. Only after the 
manufactured drugs have been verified and accepted quality shall be allowed to 
be cleared for sale. 
It should be essential to maintain the record of date, manpower, machine and 
equipments used and to keep in proce ss record of various shodhana, bhavana, 
buring in fire and specific grindings in terms of internal use. 
1.1(L) Distribution Records - Records of sale and distribution of each batch of 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs shall be maintained in order to facili tate 
prompt and complete recall of the batch, if necessary. 
The duration of record keeping should be the date of expiry of the batch, Certain 
categories of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani medicines like Bhasma, Rasa, Kupi -
pakva, Parpati, Sindura, Karpu/Uppu/Puram, Kushta, Asava- arista, etc. do not 
have expiry date, in contrast their efficacy increases with the passage of time. 
Hence, records need to be maintained up to 5 years of the exhausting of stock. 
1.1(M) Record of Market Complaints- Manufacturers shall maintain a register to record 
all reports of market complaints received regarding the products sold in the 
market. The manufacturer shall enter all data received on such market 
complaints, investigations carried out by the manufacturers regarding the 
complaint as well as any corrective action initiated to prevent recurrence of such 
market complaints shall also be recorded. Once in a period of six months the 
manufacturer shall submit the record such complaints to the Licensing Authority. 
The Register shall a lso be available for inspection during any inspection of the 
premises. 
Reports of any adverse reaction resulting from the use of Ayurvedic, Siddha and 
Unani drugs shall also be maintained in a separate register by each 
manufacturer. The manufacturer shall investigate any of the adverse reaction to 
find if the same is due to any defect in the product, and whether such reactions 
are already reported in the literature or it is a new observation. 
1.1(N) Quality Control- Every licensee is required to provide fa cility for quality control 
section in his own premises or through Government- approved testing laboratory. 
The test shall be as per the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani pharmacopoeial 
standard. Where the tests are not available, the test should be performed 
according to the manufacturer’s specification or other information available. The 
quality control section shall verify all the raw materials, monitor in process, quality 
checks and control the quality of finished product being released to finished 
goods store/w arehouse. Preferably for such quality control there will be a 
separate expert. The quality control section shall have the following facilities: 
(1) There should be 150 sq feet area for quality control section. 
(2) For identification of raw drugs, refere nce books and reference samples

===== PAGE 5 =====
should be maintained. 
(3) Manufacturing record should be maintained for the various processes. 
(4) To verify the finished products, controlled samples of finished products of 
each batch will be kept till the expiry date of product. 
(5) To supervise and monitor adequacy of conditions under which raw materials, 
semi-finished products and finished products are stored. 
(6) Keep record in establishing shelf life and storage requirements for the drugs. 
(7) Manufacturers who ar e manufacturing patent proprietary Ayurveda, Siddha 
and Unani medicines shall provide their own specification and control 
references in respect of such formulated drugs. 
(8) The record of specific method and procedure of preparation, that is, 
“Bhavana”, “ Mardana” and “Puta” and the record of every process carried 
out by the manufacturer shall be maintained. 
(9) The standards for identity, purity and strength as given in respective 
pharmacopoeias of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems of medicines 
published by Government of India Shall be complied with. 
(10) All raw materials will be monitored for fungal, bacterial contamination with a 
view to minimize such contamination. 
(11) Quality control section will have a minimum of-
(i) One person with Ayurveda/Un ani/Siddha qualification recognized under 
Schedule II of Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970. Two other 
persons, one each with Bachelor qualification in 
Botany/Chemistry/Pharmacy could be on part-time or on contractual basis. 
(ii) The manufacturing unit shall have a quality control section as explained 
under Section 35(ii). Alternatively, these quality control provisions will be met 
by getting testing, etc., from a recognized laboratory for Ayurveda, Siddha 
and Unani drugs; under Rule 160-A of the Dr ugs and Cosmetics Act. The 
manufacturing company will maintain all the record of various tests got done 
from outside recognized laboratory. 
(iii) List of equipment recommended is indicated in Part II-C. 
1.2 Requirement for Sterile Product: 
(A) Manufacturing Areas – For the manufacture of sterile Ayurvedic, Unani and 
Siddha drugs, separate enclosed areas specifically designed for the purpose shall 
be provided. These areas shall be provided with air locks for entry and shall be 
essentially dust free and ventilated with an air supply. For all areas where aseptic 
manufacture has to be carried out, air supply shall be filtered through bacteria 
retaining filters (HEPA Filters) and shall be at a pressure higher than in the 
adjacent areas. The filters shall be checked for performance on installation and 
periodically thereafter the record of checks shall be maintained. All the surfaces in 
sterile manufacturing areas shall be designed to facilitate cleaning and 
disinfection. For sterile manufacturing routine micro bial counts of all Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani drug manufacturing areas shall be carried out during 
operations. Results of such count shall be checked against established in- house 
standards and record maintained. 
Access to manufacturing areas shall be rest ricted to minimum number of 
authorized personnel. Special procedure to be followed for entering and leaving 
the manufacturing areas shall be written down and displayed. 
For the manufacturing of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drug that can be sterilized 
in their final containers, the design of the areas shall preclude the possibility of the 
products intended for sterilization being mixed with or taken to be products 
already sterilized. In case of terminally sterilized products, the design of the areas 
shall preclude the possibility of mix-up between non-sterile products. 
(B) Precautions against contamination and mix:

===== PAGE 6 =====
(a) Carrying out manufacturing operations in a separate block of adequately 
isolated building or operating in an isolated enclosure within the building, 
(b) Using appropriate pressure differential in the process area. 
(c) Providing a suitable exhaust system. 
(d) Designing laminar flow sterile air system for sterile products. 
(e) The germicidal efficiency of UV lamps shall be checked and record ed 
indicating the burning hours or checked using intensity. 
(f) Individual containers of liquids and ophthalmic solutions shall be examined 
against black-white background fitted with diffused light after filling to ensure 
freedom from contamination with foreign suspended matter. 
(g) Expert technical staff approved by the Licensing Authority shall check and 
compare actual yield against theoretical yield before final distribution of the 
batch. 
All process controls as required under master formula includin g room 
temperature, relative humidity, volume filled, leakage and clarity shall be 
checked and recorded. 
PART-II 
A. LIST OF RECOMMENDED MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT AND MINIMUM 
MANUFACTURING PREMISES REQUIRED FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF 
VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA SYSTEM OF MEDICINES 
One machine indicated for one category of medicine could be used for the manufacturing of 
other category of medicine also. Similarly some of the manufacturing areas like powdering, 
furnace, packing of liquids and Avaleha, Paks, could also be shared for these items. 
Sl.No. 
(1) 
Category of Medicine 
(2) 
Minimum 
manufacturing 
space required 
(3) 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(4) 
1200 Square feet 
covered area with 
separate cabins or 
partitions for each 
activity. If Unani 
medicines are 
manufactured in 
same premises an 
additional area of 
400 sq. feet will be 
required. 
1. Anjana/Pisti 100 sq. feet. Karel/mechanized/motorized, karel. 
End runner/Ball-Mill Sieves/Shifter. 
2. Churna / Nasya/ 
Manjan/Lepa/ 
Kwath Churn 
200 sq feet Grinder/disintegrator/Pulveriser/ 
Powder mixer/sieves/shifter. 
3. Pills/Vati /Gutika 
Matirai and tablets 
100 sq. feet Ball Mill, Mass mixer/powder mixer, 
Granulator, drier, tablet compressing 
machine, pill/vati cutting machine, 
stainless steel trays/container for 
storage and sugar coating, polishing 
pan in case of sugar-coated 
tablets,mechanised chattoo (for 
mixing guggulu) where required.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Sl.No. 
(1) 
Category of Medicine 
(2) 
Minimum 
manufacturing
space required 
(3) 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(4) 
4. Kupi pakava/Ksara/ 
Parpati/LavanaBhasma 
Satva/Sindura Karpu/ 
Uppu / Param 
150 sq. feet Bhatti, Karahi/Stainless steel 
Vessels/Patila Flask, Multani 
Matti/Plaster of Paris, Copper Rod, 
Earthern container, Gaj Put Bhatti, 
Mufflefurnace(Electrically operated) 
End/EdgeRunner, Exhaust Fan, 
Wooden/S.S.Spatula. 
5. Kajal 100 sq. feet Earthern lamps for collection of Kajal, 
Triple Roller Mill, End Runner, 
Sieves, S.S.Patila, Filling/ packing 
and manufacturing room should be 
provided with exhaust fan and ultra 
violet lamps. 
6. Capsules 100 sq. feet Air Conditioner, De-humidifier, 
hygrometer, thermometer, Capsule 
filling machine and chemical balance. 
7. Ointment/Marham Pasai 100sq. feet Tube filling machine, Crimping 
Machine/Ointment Mixer, End 
Runner/ Mill (Where required) S.S. 
Storage Container S.S.Patila. 
8. Pak/Avaleh/Khand/ 
Modak/Lakayam 
100 sq. feet Bhatti section fitted with exhaust fan 
and should be fly proof, Iron 
Kadahi/S.S. Patila and S.S. Storage 
container. 
9. Panak, Syrup / Pravahi 
Kwath Manapaku 
150 sq, feet Tincture press, exhaust fan fitted and 
fly proof, Bhatti section, Bottle 
washing machine, filter press / 
Gravity filter, liquid filling machine, 
P.P. Capping Machine. 
10. Asava / Arishta 200 sq. ft Same as mentioned above. 
Fermentation tanks, containers and 
distillation plant where necessary, 
Filter Press. 
11. Sura 100 sq. ft Same as mentioned above plus 
Distillation plant and Transfer pump. 
12. Ark Tinir 100 sq. ft Maceration tank, Distillation plant, 
Liquid filling tank with tap / Gravity 
filter/Filter press, Visual inspection 
box. 
13. Tail/Ghrit Ney 100 sq. ft Bhatti, Kadahi/S.S. Patila 
S.S.Storage Containers, Filtration 
equipment, filling tank with tap/Liquid 
filling machine. 
14. Aschyotan / Netra Malham 
Panir/Karn Bindu/Nasa-
bindu 
100 sq. ft Hot air oven electrically heated with 
thermostatic control, kettle gas or 
electrically heated with suitable 
mixing arrangements, collation mill, 
or ointment mill, tube filling

===== PAGE 8 =====
Sl.No. 
(1) 
Category of Medicine 
(2) 
Minimum 
manufacturing
space required 
(3) 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(4) 
equipment, mixing and storage tanks 
of stainless steel or of other suitable 
material sintered glass funnel, seitz 
filter or filter candle, liquid filling 
equipment, autoclave. 
15. Each manufacturing unit 
will have a separate area 
for Bhatti, furnace boilers, 
puta, etc. This will have 
proper ventilation, removal 
of smoke, prevention of 
flies, insets, dust etc. The 
furnace section could have 
tin roof. 
200 sq. ft 
B. LIST OF MACHINERY, E QUIPMENT AND MINIMUM MANUFACTURING PREMISES 
REQUIRED FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF UNANI 
SYSTEM OF MEDICINES 
One machine indicated for one category of medicine could be used for the manufacturing of 
other category of medicine also. Similarl y some of the manufacturing areas like powdering, 
furnace, packing of liquids could also be shared for these items. 
Sl.No. 
(1) 
Category of 
Medicine 
(2) 
Minimum manufacturing 
space required 
(3) 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(4) 
1200 square feet covered 
area with separate cabins, 
partitions for each activity. 
If Ayurveda / Siddha 
Medicines are also 
manufactured in same 
premises an additional 
area of 400 square feet 
will be required. 
1. Itrifal Tirya/majoon/ 
Laooq/Jawarish 
Khamiras 
100 sq. feet Grinder/ Pulveriser, Sieves, powder 
mixer (if required), S.S. Patilas, Bhatti 
and other accessories, plant mixer for 
Khamiras. 
2. Arq. 100 sq. feet Distillation Plant (garembic) S.S. 
storage tank, Boiling Vessel, Gravity 
filter, Bottle filling machine, Bottle 
washing machine, Bottle drier. 
3. Habb (Pills) and 
tablets. 
100 sq. feet Ball Mill, Mass Mixer/Powder mixer, 
Granulator drier, tablet compressing 
machine, pill/vati cutting machine, 
stainless steal trays/ container for 
storage and sugar coating, polishing

===== PAGE 9 =====
Sl.No. 
(1) 
Category of 
Medicine 
(2) 
Minimum manufacturing 
space required
(3) 
Machinery/equipment 
recommended 
(4) 
pan in case of sugar-coated tablets, 
mechanized chattoo, (for mixing 
guggul) where required. 
4. Sufoof (Powder) 200 sq. feet Grinder / pulveriser, Sieves, Trays, 
Scoops, Powder mixer (where 
required). 
5. Raughan (oils) 
(Crushing and 
boiling) 
100 sq. feet Oil Expeller, S.S. Patilas Oil filter 
bottle, Filling machine, Bottle drier, 
Bhatti. 
6. Shiyaf, Surma, 
Kajal 
100 sq. feet End runner, mixing S.S. Vessel. 
7. Marham, Zimad 
(Ointment) 
100 sq. feet Kharal, Bhatti, End runner, Grinder, 
Pulveriser, Triple Roller Mill (if 
required). 
8. Qurs (Tab.) 100 sq. feet Grinder/Pulveriser, Sieves, Powder 
mixer (where needed), Granulator, 
Drier, Tablet Compressing Machine, 
Die punches Trays, O.T. Apparatus, 
Balance with weights, Scoops, Sugar 
Coating Pan, polishing pan, Heater. 
9. Kushta 100 sq. feet Bhatti, Kharal, Sil Batta, Earthen pots. 
10. Murabba 100 sq. feet Aluminium Vessels 50-100 kgs. 
Capacity, Gendna, Bhatti. 
11. Capsule 100 sq. feet Pulveriser, Powder mixer (where 
needed), capsule filling machine, Air 
conditioner, De-humidifier, Balance 
with weights, storage containers, 
glass. 
12. Sharbat and 
Joshanda 
100 sq. feet Tinctum Press, exhaust fan fitted, 
Bhatti section, Bottle washing 
machine, Filter Press Gravity filter, 
Liquid filling tank with tap/liquid filling 
machine, hot air oven electrically 
heated with thermostatic control, 
kettle. 
13. Qutoor-e- Chashm 
and Marham (Eye 
drops, eye 
ointment) 
100 sq. feet Hot air oven electrically heated with 
thermostatic control, kettle. 
C. LIST OF EQUIPMENT RECOMMENDED FOR IN-HOUSE QUALITY CONTROL 
SECTION 
(Alternatively, unit can get testing done from the Government approved laboratory). 
(A) CHEMISTRY SECTION (B) PHARMACOGNOSY SECTION 
1. Alcohol Determination Apparatus (complete 
set) 
1. Microscope Binoculor.

===== PAGE 10 =====
5
10
15
20
25
(A) CHEMISTRY SECTION (B) PHARMACOGNOSY SECTION 
2. Volatile Oil Determination Apparatus. 2. Dissecting Microscope. 
3. Boiling Point Determination Apparatus. 3. Microtome. 
4. Melting Point Determination Apparatus. 4. Physical Balance. 
. Refractometer. 5. Aluminium Slide Trays. 
6. Polarimeter. 6. Stage Micrometer. 
7. Viscometer. 7. Camera Lucida (Prism and Mirror 
Type). 
8. Tablet Disintegration Apparatus. 8. Chemicals, Glassware etc. 
9. Moisture Meter. 
. Muffle Furnace. 
11. Electronic Balance. 
12. Magnetic Stirrer. 
13. Hot Air Oven. 
14. Refrigerator. 
. Glass/Steel Distillation Apparatus. 
16. LPG Gas Cylinders with Burners. 
17. Water Bath (Temperature controlled.) 
18. Heating Mantles/ Hot Plates. 
19. TLC Apparatus with all accessories (Manual) 
. Paper Chromatography apparatus with 
accessories. 
21. Sieve size 10 to120 with Sieve shaker. 
22. Centrifuge Machine. 
23. Dehumidifier. 
24. pH Meter. 
. Limit Test Apparatus. 
Note: - The above requirements of machinery, equipments, space are made subject to the 
modification at the discretion of the Licensing Authority; if he is of the opinion that having 
regard to the nature and extent of the manufacturing operations it is necessary to relax or 
alter them in the circumstances in a particular case.
