===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
MANUAL OF PATENT OFFICE PRACTICE  
AND  PROCEDURE 
Version 3.0 
26th November, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED BY: 
THE OFFICE OF CONTROLLER GENERAL OF PATENTS, 
DESIGNS & TRADEMARKS 
BOUDHIK SAMPADA BHAWAN, 
S.M. ROAD, ANTOP HILL, MUMBAI (INDIA)

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
 
PREFACE 
The Patents Act, 1970 was amended in 1999, 2002 and finally in 2005 to  provide for product 
patents in chemicals, pharmaceuticals, food and agro -chemicals and bring in other necessary 
amendments in line with Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). Patents 
Rules have been commensurately amended , initially as Patent Rules, 2003, which were further 
amended in 2005, 2006, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2016 , 2017 and 2019.  India became signatory to P atent 
Cooperation Treaty (P CT) in 1998. Consequently, patent filin g in India , including National Phase 
applications under PCT , has increased exponentially. Indian Patent Office is a major PCT filing 
country and also functions as ISA/IPEA under PCT. 
 Indian Patent Office has been modernized in terms of automation, IT enab lement and 
electronic processing of patent applications  during last decade . The objective of modernization 
project was to increase the functional efficiency and streamline the procedures in tune with 
international best practices. 
Considerable changes have been effected in  patenting p rocedures from time to time  in 
accordance with the provisions of the amended Act and Rules  and also to bring in automation, 
electronic work -flow, comprehensive e -filing, simplified and transparen t procedures and  
efficient public  service delivery of IP services . 
 The office has been regularly publishing the Manual of Patent Office Practice and   Procedure 
to codify patent procedures for streamlining the functioning , provide  benefit to stakeholders  and 
also to provide guidance for prosecution of patent applications at Patent Office.  
In view of the recent amendment s of Patent Rules, reengineering of patent procedures and 
automation in almost all activities in  Patent Office, there has been demand to revise and update the 
present Manual.  
Accordingly, the present version of Manual of Patent Office Practice and Procedure, 
hereinafter referred to  as ―Manual‖, has been prepared  which is yet another step to fulfill our 
commitments towards more efficiency and transparency in the functioning of Patent Office. 
 This Manual may be considered as a practical guide for effective prosecution of patent 
applications in India. However, it does not constitute rule making and, hence, does not have the force 
and effect of law. 
The Manual will be revised  from time to ti me based on interpretations by courts of l aw, 
statutory amendments and valuable inputs from the stakeholders. 
 
(Om Prakash Gupta) 
Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
 
INDEX 
Chapter  01: Introduction……………………………………………………….4 
Chapter  02: Key Definitions…………………………………………………….6 
Chapter  03: Filing of Patent Application………………………………………10 
Chapter  04: Publication of Application ………………………………………..31 
Chapter  05: Provisional and Complete Specification ………………………….34 
Chapter  06: Divisional Application and Patent of Addition ………………….. 48 
Chapter  07: Convention Application, International Application and 
                   National Phase Application ……………………………………….52 
Chapter  08: Indian Patent Office as International Searching Authority  
                   and Indian International Preliminary Examination Authority.……. 68 
Chapter 09: Examination and Grant…………………………………………...76 
Chapter 10: Post-grant Opposition …………………….……………………..115 
Chapter 11: Post-grant Procedures …………………………………………. 118 
Chapter 12: Appeals…………………………………………………………. 127 
Chapter 13: Revocation of Patent………………………………………….....129 
Chapter 14: Compulsory Licensing…………………………………. ………..131 
Chapter 15: Use of inventions for purposes of Government; Acquisition of     
inventions and  patents  by the Central  Government………….  141 
Chapter 16: Patent Agents …………………………………………………   147 
Chapter 17: Offences and Penalties ………………………………………….152 
Chapter 18: General Powers of Controller………………………………….. .154 
Chapter 19: General Services ……………………………………………….. 161 
Chapter 20: Scientific Advisors……………………………………………....165 
Chapter 21: Miscellaneous Provisions ……………………………………....168 
Chapter 22: Time Lines ……………………………………………………………….171

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
 
Chapter-1: Introduction 
1. This manual has been compiled with an intention to codify the prac tices and procedures being 
followed by the Indian Patent Office and  the same is intended to serve as a procedural guide 
for practitioners and other users of the Indian Patent System. 
2. Indian Patent Office functions from four locations viz. Delhi, Mumbai, Ko lkata and Chennai 
with defined area s of territorial jurisdiction. Introduction of office automation and electronic 
processing of patent applications has resulted in uniformity and transparency  in functioning of 
the office . A com plete file wrapper in respec t of published  patent applications including , 
information related to publication , examination reports , status of application , amendments, 
grant, opposition, renewal and decisions of controllers  as well as legal status of patents in the 
form of electronic P atent R egister, has been  made available to the public. This manual is 
expected to bring in further transparency and uniformity in patent office practices. . 
3. Processing of patent application s is a multi -stage process, involving filing of an application, 
electronic data processing, screening and classification, publication, examination,  hearing if 
required, pre-grant opposition and grant/refusal.  
4. This manual is intended to spell out patent office practices and procedure and bridge any 
information gap that may be currently existing  in this regard. It is not intended to be the 
interpretation of the Indian Patents Act and Rules made thereunder.  
5. The  procedure  for  filing  p atent  application  and  its  processing  up  to  grant /refusal, 
maintenance etc. is exp lained in the following chapters  except infringement proceedings. 
Certain matters like exceptions to the rights of patentee, Government use, compulsory 
licensing, etc. have also been included. 
6. Some of the key definitions have been explained in Chapter-2. 
7. Chapters 3 to 8 relate to the procedure for filing of patent applications including ordinary and 
PCT national phase application s, convention and  PCT international applications, patent of 
addition, divisional application and functioning of Indian Patent Office as ISA/IPEA. 
8. Chapters 9 to11 relate to examination, grant, pre-grant and post-grant oppositions. 
9. Chapters 12 to 14 relate to the post-grant procedures such as maintenance of patent, appeal, 
revocation, compulsory licensing and use of patents for the purpose of Government. 
10. Chapters 15 to 21 relate to Patent Agents, offences and penalties, general powers of Controller, 
general services, scientific advisors and miscellaneous provisions. 
11. Time lines prescribed under the Act and Rules have been dealt with separately in Chapter 22. 
12. The officers, appointed under section 73 (2) of the Act having delegated statutory powers, have

===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
 
some discretionary powers under the Act, which are to be exercised cautiously and judiciously. 
They shall not be guided solely by the contents of this manual, but shall take judicious decisions 
based on the Act, Rules and judicial decisions available in the matter. However, all officers of 
Patent Office shall uniformly follow the procedures set forth in the Manual.  
13. Common Procedures and Practices:  
a) Affidavit and Evidence: Subject to anything contrary to the directions issued by the 
Controller, evidence shall be given by way of an affidavit in all proceedings before 
the Controller, as may be required under the Act or Rules . As per Section 77(1)(c) of 
the Act and Rule 126 of the Patents Rules , the Controller has the power to receive 
evidence on affidavits which shall be duly sworn in. Nevertheless, a self-declaration 
signed before the Controller, who is legally empowered to receive the evidence , may 
also be considered as admissible evidence in any proceeding before the Controller 
under the Patents Act, if the Controller so allows.  
b) Consequent upon adopting the e -filing system , where certain documents are 
required to be filed in original, only one copy of such documents shall be submitted 
to the appropriate Patent Office.  
c) The latest doc ument filed by the applicant shall be considered as final and the 
corresponding earlier document shall be deemed to have been superseded and 
cancelled by the applicant. 
d) Power of Attorney in Form -26 shall be stamped appropriately under the Indian 
Stamps Act.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
 
Chapter 02: Key definitions 
02.01 General  
 For better appreciation of th e Manual, the user may require to have 
clear understanding of certain terms whic h are defined in the Act and 
Rules. Some of the important definitions are as under: 
 
02.02 Definitions  
02.02.01 ―appropriate office‖ means the appropriate office of the Patent Office 
as specified in rule 4. 
Rule 2(b), 4 
02.02.02 "assignee" includes an assignee of the assignee and the legal 
representative of a deceased assignee and references to the assignee of 
any person include references to the assignee of the legal representative 
or assignee of that person. 
Section 
2(1)(ab) 
02.02.03 "capable  of  industrial  application",  in  relation  to  an invention,  
means  that  the invention  is  capable of being made or used in an 
industry 
Section 
2(1)(ac) 
02.02.04 "Controller‖ means the Controller General of Patents,  Designs and 
Trade Marks referred to in Section 73 (1).  
 The Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks is 
appointed by the Government of India under Section 3 of the 
Trademarks Act, 1999. The person so appointed will be the Controller 
of Patents for the purposes of the Patents Act, 1970. 
The Central Government may appoint examiners and other officers 
with designations as deemed fit . The officers so appointed shall 
discharge, under the superintendence and directions of the Controller 
General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks , such fun ctions of the 
Controller under this Act, as he may authorize in writing from time to 
time, by general or special order. 
Any reference to the Controller shall be construed as including a 
reference to any officer discharging such functions of the Controller 
in pursuance of Section 73.  
The Controller General has authorized Assistant Controllers, Deputy 
Controllers, Joint Controllers and Senior Joint Controllers to 
discharge certain functions of the Controller, under the Act. 
Section 
2(1)(b), 
2(2)(a), and 
73; 
Section 3 of 
Trademarks 
Act, 1999

===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
 
The Controller General has the pow er to withdraw any matter 
pending before an officer, by an order in writing and for reasons to be 
recorded therein, and deal with such matter himself, either de novo or 
from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the same to another 
officer who may,  subject to s pecial directions in the order of  such 
transfer, proceed with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was 
so transferred. 
02.02.05 "Government undertaking" means any industrial undertaking 
carried on – 
a. By a department of the Government, or 
b. by a corporation established by a Central, Provincial or 
State Act, which is owned or controlled by the 
Government, or 
c. by a Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or 
d. by  an  institution  wholly  or  substantially financed by the 
Government. 
Section 
2(1)(h), 
Section 617 
of the 
Companies 
Act, 1956 
02.02.06 ―international application‖ means  an application for patent made in 
accordance with the Patent Co-operation Treaty . 
Section 
2(1)(ia) 
02.02.07 "invention" means a new product or process involving an inventive 
step and capable of industrial application. 
Section 
2(1)(j) 
02.02.08 "inventive  step"  means  a  feature  of  an  invention   that involves  
technical  advance  as  compared  to  the  existing knowledge or 
having economic significance or both and  that makes the invention 
not obvious to a person skilled in the art. 
Section 
2(1)(ja) 
 
02.02.09 "legal representative"  me ans  a  p erson  w ho  in  law  represents the 
estate of a deceased person. 
Section 
2(1)(k) 
02.02.10 ―Opposition Board‖ means an Opposition Board constituted under 
sub - section (3) of section 25. 
Section 
25(3), (1)(la) 
02.02.11 "patentee" means the person for the time being entered on the register 
as the grantee or proprietor of the patent. 
Section 
2(1)(p) 
02.02.12 ― patent  office"  means  the  patent  office  referred  to  in section74  
Unlike many  other  Countries,  Indian Patent Office functions from 
four loca tions viz. Kolkata, Delhi, Chennai and Mumbai  for  the  
purpose  of facilitating processing of patent applications. 
Section 
2(1)(r), 
2(2)(b), 74 
02.02.13 "person" includes the Government. Section  
2(1)(s)

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
 
02.02.14 "person interested" includes  a person e ngaged  in,  or in promoting, 
research in the same field as that to which the invention relates. 
Section 2(1) 
(t) 
02.02.15 "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. Section 
2(1) (u) 
02.02.16 "prescribed manner" includes the payment of the  prescribed fee. Section 
2(1) (v) 
02.02.17 "small entity" means, -  
(i) in case of an enterprise engaged in the manufacture or production of 
goods, an enterprise where the investment in plant and machinery does 
not exceed the limit specified for a medium enterprise under clause (a) 
of sub -section (1) of section 7 of the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006); and 
(ii) in case of an enterprise engaged in providing or rendering of 
services, an enterprise where the investment in equipment is not more 
than the limit specified for medium enterprises under clause (b) of sub-
section (I) of Section 7 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006. 
Explanation 1 :  For the purpose of this clause, "enterprise" means a n 
industrial undertaking or a business concern or any other establishment, 
by whatever name called, engaged in the manufacture or production of 
goods, in any manner, pertaining to any industry specified in the First 
Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 
of 1951) or engaged in providing or rendering of any service or services 
in such an industry.  
Explanation 2:  In calculating the investment in plant and machinery, 
the cost of pollution control, research and development, indu strial 
safety devices and such other things as may be specified by notification 
under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Dev elopment Act, 
2006 (27 of 2006), shall be excluded. 
Explanation 3:  The reference rates of foreign currency of the Reserve 
Bank of India shall prevail. 
In case of foreign entity, the applicant shall  furnish the declaration to 
the effect that the quantum  of  investment in plants and 
machinery/equipment is within the limit  prescribed under the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006 of 
India). 
 
Rule 2(fa), 
Section 7 (1) 
(b) of MSME 
Development 
Act, 2006

===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
 
02.0218 "Startup" means- 
(a)   an entity in India recognised as a startup by the competent 
authority under Startup India initiative. 
(b)   In case of  a foreign entity, an entity fulfilling the criteria for 
turnover and period of incorporation/ registration as per Startup 
India Initiative and submitting declaration to that effect. 
Explanation: In calculating the turnover, reference rates of foreign 
currency of Reserve Bank of India shall prevail. 
 
Rule 2(fb) 
 
02.02.19 "true and first inventor" does not include either the first importer of an 
invention into India, or a person to whom an invention is first 
communicated from outside India. 
Section 
2(1)(y)

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
 
Chapter 03: Filing of Patent Application 
03.01 Applicant 
 An application for a patent for an invention may be made by any of 
the following persons either alone or jointly with any other person: 
- True and first inventor 
- True and first inventor‗s assignee 
- Legal representative of any deceased true and first inventor or 
his/her assignee 
 The term "person" as defined in the Patents Act includes 
Government.  
 True and first inventor does not include either the first importer of 
an invention into India or a person t o whom an invention is first 
communicated from outside India.  
 An applicant is required to disclose the name, address and 
nationality of the true and first inventor(s). 
 "Assignee" can be a natural person or legal person such as , a 
registered company, small entity, startup,  research organization, an 
educational institute or the Government. 
 Assignee includes assignee of an assignee also.  
 Where the inventor(s) is/are not the applicant (s), a proof of right 
to apply for a patent shall be submitted  by way of en dorsement in 
the appropriate paragraph of Form -1 or as an assignment from 
inventor(s) in favour of applicant(s), duly authenticated, irrespective 
of whether the application is a Convention or National Phase 
application. It shall be filed within 6 months fr om the date of filing 
of the application in India.  
 "Natural person" means any individual or a group of individuals. 
 "Other than natural person" includes a registered company, small 
entity, startup, research organization, educational institute or 
Government. 
 "Legal representative " means a person who in law represents the 
estate of a deceased person. In such a case, the Legal 
Representative is required to file appropriate legal instruments as 
proof of right. 
Section 6, 
7(2) 54, 
134, 135; 
Rule 10 
Form-1

===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
 
03.01.01 Procedure to be followed  for  substitution of applicants etc.  
(1)(a) If the Controller is satisfied with the claim that, by virtue of any 
assignment or agreement in writing made by the applicant or one of 
the applicants for the patent or by operati on of law, the claimant 
would,  if the patent were then granted, be entitled thereto or to the 
interest of the applicant therein, or to an undivided share of the 
patent or of that interest, the Controller may direct that the 
application shall proceed in th e name of the claimant or in the 
names of the claimants and the applicant or the other joint 
applicant or applicants accordingly, as the case may require.  
           Such a claim shall be made in Form 6 in the prescribed manner at 
any time before a grant of patent. 
(b)  No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any 
assignment or agreement made by one of two or more joint 
applicants for a patent except with the consent of the other joint 
applicant or applicants. 
(c )   The original assignment or agreement or an official copy or  
      notarized copy thereof shall also be produced for the Controller's  
      inspection and the Controller may call for such other proof of title 
or written consent, as he may require. 
(d)   Further, the Controller shall not issue any such direction unless: 
i. the invention is identified in the agreement or assignment by 
reference to the number of application for the patent, or 
ii. there is an   assignment/ agreement  produced before the 
Controller by the person to  whom it was made, indicating   
that   the assignment or agreement relates to the invention in 
respect of which the application is made, or 
iii. the rights of the claimant in respect of the invention have 
been finally established by decision of a court, or 
iv.  the Controller takes a decision after hearing the disputed 
parties as per the proceedings  under   section 20 (5) of the 
rules.   
(2)   Where one of two or more joint applicants for a patent dies at any 
Section 20, 
34-36, 
Form-6

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 
 
time before the grant of patent, the Controller may, upon a request in 
that behalf made by the survivor or survivors, and with the consent of 
the legal representative of the deceased, direct that the application shall 
proceed in the name of the survivor or survivors alone. 
Such request shall be made in Form 6 and shall be accompanied by 
proof of death of the joint applicant and a certified copy of the 
probate of the will of the deceased or letters of administration in 
respect of his estate or any other document to prove that the person 
who gives the cons ent is the legal representative of the deceased 
applicant. 
(3) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent as to 
whether or in what manner the application should be proceeded 
with, the Controller may, upon application made to him in the 
prescribed manner by any of the parties, and after giving an 
opportunity to be heard to all parties concerned, give such 
directions as he thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed in 
the name of one or more of the parties alone or for regulating the 
manner in which it should be proceeded with, or for both those 
purposes, as the case may require. 
      Such application shall be made in Form 6 in duplicate and shall be 
accompanied by a statement setting out fully the facts upon which 
the applicant relies and the directions which he seeks. A copy of the 
application and statement shall be sent by the Controller to every 
other joint applicant. 
03.02 Jurisdiction 
Unlike many other Countries, Indian Patent Office functions from 
four locations viz. Kolkata, Delhi, Chennai and Mumbai for carrying 
out all procedures relating to pa tents. 
An   application for patent shall be filed with the Patent Office having 
appropriate jurisdiction. A territorial jurisdiction of  patent office in 
respect of a patent application  is decided based on any of the 
following: 
i. Place of residence, domicile or business of the applicant (first 
mentioned applicant in case of joint applicants) or, 
Section 16, 
74. 
Rule 4, 5.

===== PAGE 13 =====
13 
 
ii.  Place  from  where  an  invention  actually originated or, 
iii.  Address  for  service  in  India  given  by  the applicant, when the 
Applicant has no place of business  or  domicile  in  India  
(Foreign applicants).  
iv. Also, the further application referred to in section 16 of the Act 
shall be filed at the appropriate offi ce of the first mentioned 
application only. 
Territorial jurisdictions are as under: 
Patent 
Office 
Territorial Jurisdiction 
Mumbai The States of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Goa, Chhattisgarh, the Union Territories of Daman & 
Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
Delhi The  States  of  Haryana,  Himachal  Pradesh, , Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, National 
Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union Territor ies of 
Chandigarh, Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh. 
Chennai The States of Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka, Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana and the Union Territories of 
Pondicherry and Lakshadweep. 
Kolkata Rest of India (States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, West 
Bengal, Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, 
Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Union Territory of 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands) 
 
An appropriate office where a patent application is filed shall not be 
ordinarily changed. 
However, the Controller may allocate an application for patent to any 
of the four Patent Offices, if required. 
All applic ants and patent agents are required to give an  address for 
service including postal address in India, an email address and a mobile 
number registered in India. 
Such address for service shall be considered for all proceedings under 
the Patents Act and Rules.

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 
 
03.03 Types of Patent Applications 
1.   Ordinary Application i.e., an application which has b een fil ed 
directly in the Indian Pa tent O ffice without claiming  priority  of 
any foreign application. 
2.    Convention Application claiming the priority of a country which 
is a member to Paris Convention 
3.    PCT National Phase Application. 
4.  Divisional Application, i.e, a further application divided out 
of the first- mentioned patent application.  
5    Patent of Addition i.e. an application for patent in respect of  any 
improvement in or modification of the invention for which the 
patent application has already been filed or patent has been 
granted. 
Section 7, 
16, 54,135 
03.04 Filing of patent application 
Every application for a patent shall be for one invention only and shall 
be filed in Form -1 at an appropriate office  along with 
provisional/complete specification (in Form 2), accompanied with  the 
prescribed fee as given in the First Schedule.  
However, a provisional specification cannot be filed in case of 
Convention Application or PCT National Phase application filed in 
India.  
(For further description of Provisional /Complete Specifications 
refer Chapter 5). 
Normal fee shall be applicable for applications containing up to 30 
pages and up to 10 claims. If the application   exceeds 30 pages or 
claims are more than 10 in number, additional fee, as given in the First 
Schedule, is payable. 
It may be noted that 10 % additional fee shall be payable when the 
application for patent and other documents are filed through physical 
mode, namely, in hard-copy format. 
E-Filing of Patent Application: 
IPO has developed THE comprehensive e -filing system for patents, 
wherein, in addition to online filing of   new applications, subsequent 
 
Section 7, 
First 
Schedule

===== PAGE 15 =====
15 
 
filing of all the documents has also been integrated. 
New and enhan ced features of Comprehensive E –filing services 
include:   
 Web-based filing system 
 Dual way login (Digital Signature as well as Password based) and 
password regeneration 
 Provision for filing of all entrie s as per First Schedule of the 
Patents Rules, 2003 
 Proper  validations with Patent Office database 
 Facility to upgrade/update digital signatures 
(https://ipindiaonline.gov.in/epatentfiling/goForLogin/doLogin) 
03.04.01 Documents required for filing  patent application 
A patent application should contain the following: 
1. Application for grant of patent in Form-1. 
2. A proof of right  is required from the inventor(s) by way of 
endorsement in the appropriate paragraph of Form -1 or as an 
assignment from inventor(s) in favour of applicant(s), duly 
authenticated, irrespective of whether the appli cation is a 
Convention or National Phase application. Accordingly, it shall be 
filed within 6 months from the date of filing of the application in 
India. 
3. Provisional/complete specification in Form-2. 
4. Statement and undertaking under Section 8 (1) in Form-3 : 
        An applicant must file information and undertaking regarding 
foreign applications in Form 3 , either along with the 
application or within 6 m onths from the date of application.  The 
applicant is also required to keep the controller informed 
regarding every application relating to same or substantially same 
invention, if any filed in any country outside India subsequently , 
within six months from the date of filing of such application. 
5. Declaration as to inventorship shall be filed in Form -5 along 
with the complete specification  where the complete specification 
is filed after provis ional specification, and also, where the 
application is either a convention application or  national phase  
application filed  in India under PCT. 
 
Section 7. 
Rule 2(fa)/ 
2(fb), 
Rule 7(1), 8, 
10, 12, 13, 
135.  
Form-1, 2, 
3, 5, 26, 28. 
Section 6 
of 
Biological 
Diversity 
Act, 2002.

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 
 
        However, the Controller may allow Form -5 to be filed within one 
month from the date of filing of complete specification, if a 
request is made to the Controller in Form-4. 
6. If an applicant is MSME/Startup, Form 28  accompanied with 
appropriate evidence in accordance with rule Rule 2  (fa)/ 2(fb) 
respectively shall be submitted.  
         In the case of “small entity or startup ”, every document for 
which fee has been specified, shall be accompanied by Form-28. 
7. Form of Authorisation: 
        Authorisation of an agent shall be filed in Form 26 or in the form 
of a power of attorney within a period of three months from the 
date of filing of such application or document, failing whi ch no 
action shall be taken on such application or documents for 
further processing till such deficiency is removed. 
        In case a general power of attorney has already been f iled in 
another application, a self-attested copy of the same shall be filed 
by the authorized Patent Agent.  
8.     Priority document is required in the following cases: 
 Convention Application (under Paris Convention). 
 PCT National Phase Application wherein requirements 
of Rule 17.1 (a or b) of regulations made under the PCT  
have not been fulfilled. 
        A priority document shall be filed along with PCT National phase 
application before the expiry of 31 months from the date of 
priority. 
9.   Every application shall bear the signature of the  applicant or 
authorized person/patent agent along with name and   date   in 
the appropriate space provided in the forms. 
        The specification shall be signed by the applicant or his authorized 
patent agent with date on the last page of the claims contained in 
the Specification.  Drawing sheets should bear the signature of an 
applicant or his authorized patent agent in the right hand bottom 
corner.

===== PAGE 17 =====
17 
 
        Where the documents have been digitally signed  by the 
Applicant/Patent Agent, there will be no requirement of physical 
signature of the agent or applicant. 
10. If the invention as disclosed in the patent specification uses  the 
biological material obtained from India, the applicant is required 
to submit the permission from the National Biodiversity 
Authority any time before the grant of the patent. (Please refer to 
Section-6 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002). 
11.   The application shall disclose in the specification the source and 
geographical origin of the biological material, if any used in 
the invention. 
03.04.02 Comprehensive E-filing: 
E-filing Portal of the Patent Office, available in the official website of 
Controller General of Patents, Designs &  Trade Marks  
(www.ipindia.nic.in), provides comprehensive platform for online 
submission of patent application and subsequent forms in a secure and 
authenticated electronic way. 
Authentication of filing is done via  a digital signature which the 
applicant or his agent must procure as Digital Signature Certificate 
(DSC) of class II or III from authorized vendors.  
Online payment of fees can be made through a payment gateway with 
all the prevalent major modes of paymen t like Net banking, Credit 
Cards, Debit Cards and Unified Payments Interface (UPI).  
The e-filing portal provides flexibility to applicants or their authorized 
agents to work from their premises on 24x7 basis, even on holidays. 
 Steps of e-filing: 
1. Visit  www.ipindia.gov.in and proceed to E-Gateways 
2. Register for New User and creation of ―user-id‖ 
3. Install Digital Signature Certificate (DSC) and configure the 
system as per the DSC manual 
4. Login to the e-filing module 
5. Select New Application Filing or any particular Form which is to 
be filed 
Rule 6

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 
 
6. Draft the Form(s) for new application or any other subsequent 
form (s) 
7. Upload the PDF version of required documents  
8. Save the draft 
9. Go to the drafted forms 
10. Enter the mobile number, if SMS alert are required 
11. Select the drafted form and proceed for signing of drafted form 
12. After the forms are digitally signed, it is ready for making the 
payment though the available Payment Gateways 
13. Select the digitally signed form and proceed for payment 
14. Select the payment gateway (NTRP-Bharatkosh payment gateway) 
15. Select the bank and payment mode to make the payment of fee 
16. After making payment, the acknowledgement receipt would be 
generated. 
Submitted Forms would then proceed to the respective section of the 
Patent Office for processing and official actions. 
(For more and updated information on the steps for e -filing, you may 
also refer to the Comprehensive E- Filing Portal). 
03.04.03 Leaving and Serving Documents at Patent Office 
1. Any Application, notice or other document authorised or 
required to be filed, left, made or given at the patent office, or to 
the Controller or to any other person under the Act or the rules,  
may be tendered by hand or sent by a  letter addressed to the 
Controller at the Appropriate Office or to that person through 
post or registered post or speed  post  or  by electronic 
transmission duly authenticated. 
2. If any such document is sent by post or regis tered post or speed 
post or by electronic transmission duly authenticated, it shall be 
deemed to have been filed, left, made or given at the time when 
the mail containing the same would have been delivered in the 
ordinary course of post or registered post or speed post or by 
electronic transmission duly authenticated, as the case may be. In 
proving such sending, it shall be sufficient to show that the mail 
was properly addressed and transmitted. 
3. A patent agent shall file, leave, make or give all documents  only 
 
Rule 6,  
6(1-A)

===== PAGE 19 =====
19 
 
by electronic transmission duly authenticated;  
4. Any document, if asked to be submitted in original, shall be 
submitted within a period of fifteen days,  failing which such 
documents shall be deemed not to have been filed. 
5. Any  written  communication  ad dressed  to  a patentee at his 
postal address or email address, as it appears on the register of 
patents or at his address for service given under rule 5, or to any 
applicant or opponent in any proceedings under the Act or the 
rules, at the postal address or email address , preferably on first 
email address  appearing on the Application or notice of  
opposition,  or  given  for  service,  shall  be deemed to be 
properly addressed. 
6. All  notices  and  all  written  communications addressed to a 
patentee, or to any applicant or opponent  in  any  proceedings  
under  the  Act  or the rules, and all documents forwarded to the 
patentee  or  to  the  said  applicant  or  opponent, shall, except 
when they are sent by special messenger, be sent by registered 
post or sp eed post or  by electronic transmission duly 
authenticated. 
7. The date of  notice or  written communication addressed to a 
patentee or to any applicant or opponent  in  any  proceedings  
under  the  Act  and the rules shall  be the date of dispatch  of the 
said notice or written communication, by registered post or speed 
post or fax or electronic transmission duly authenticated, as the 
case may be, unless otherwise specified under the Act or the 
rules. 
8.(i)  In case of delay in receipt of a document or  comm unication sent 
by the Patent office to a party to any proceedings under the Act or 
the rules, the delay in transmitting or resubmitting a document to 
the Patent office or doing any act by the party may  be  condoned  
by     the     Controller  if  a petiti on  for such condonation of 
delay is made by the party to the Controller immediately after the 
receipt  of  the  document  or   communication along  with  the  
statement  regarding  the circumstances of the fact and evidence

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 
 
in support of the statement. 
        Whenever an applicant is unable to submit the documents in time 
due to failure of server/Bharat Kosh/IT infrastructure on part of 
the Office, the applicant/patent agent is required to take screen 
shot of the problem and submit the same to the Office along with 
a statement regarding the circumstances of the facts as evidence 
in support as per Rule 6(5), whereupon such delay may be 
condoned after due verification by the Office. 
        Such delay condoned by the Controller shall not exceed the period 
between the date on which the party was supposed to have 
received the document or communication by ordinary course of 
mail or electronic transmission duly authenticated and the actual 
date of receipt of the same. 
(ii).  The condonation of such delay can als o be made for reasons of 
war, revolution, civil disorder, strike, natural calamity, a general 
unavailability of electronic communication services or other 
similar reasons occurred in the locality where the applicant/agent 
resides or has place of business. The delay can be allowed when 
the applicant/agent files a petition for condonation of such delay 
to the Controller provided the situation was of such severity that 
it disrupted the normal communication in that area  and that the 
petition is filed within maximum one month from the date of 
cessation of the such situation.    
        Such delay condoned by the Controller shall not exceed the period 
for which national emergency was in force, or six months from 
the expiry of the prescribed period, whichever is earlier. 
(iii)   A petition(s)  as referred to  above can be filed in Form 30, as no 
specific Form is provided for petition under rule 6 (5) and 6 (6). 
03.04.04 Receiving Documents in office: 
1. The  application  and  any  other  documents  wi th or  without  
accompanying  fees  is received at the Patent Office at separate 
counters i.e., Fee Counter and Non-Fee Counter , respectively. 
2. The fee bearing documents are  sent to the fee counter and the

===== PAGE 21 =====
21 
 
non-fee bearing documents are sent to the non-fee counter. 
3. The  application  and  any  other  documents  wi th or  without  
accompanying  fees  is received at the Patent Office at separate 
counters i.e., Fee Counter and Non-Fee Counter , respectively. 
4. The fee bearing documents are  sent to the fee counter and the 
non-fee bearing documents are sent to the non-fee counter. 
5. The staff at the fee counter makes relevant entries in the module , 
stamps the documents so received, generates the Cash Book 
Receipts (CBRs) and enters the CBR number, date, amount of fee 
received, application number, patent number or other releva nt 
entries. 
6. The staff at the non -fee counter makes relevant entry in the 
document receipt module and stamps the documents  
7.      The documents from both the counters are sent to Electronic 
Data Processing (EDP) Section for digitization 
03.04.05 Language and Paper-size etc. 
 All documents and copies of the documents, except affidavits and 
drawings, filed with patent office, shall be: 
1. typewritten or printed in Hindi or English (unless otherwise 
directed or allowed by the Controller) in large and legible 
characters not less than 0.28 centimetre high with deep indelible 
ink with lines widely spaced no t less than one and half spaced, 
only upon one side of the paper; 
2. on such paper which is flexible, strong, white, smooth, non-shiny, 
and durable o f size A4 of approxim ately 29.7 centimetre by 
21centimetre with a margin of at least 4 centimetre on the top 
and left hand part and 3 centimetre on the bottom and right hand 
part thereof; 
3. numbered in consecutive Arabic numerals in the centre of the 
bottom of the sheet; and 
4. containing numbering to every fifth line of each page of the 
description and claims at right half of the left margin. 
5. additional copies of all documents shall be filed at the appropriate 
Rule 9

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 
 
office as may be required by the Controller. 
6. names and addresses of appl icant and other persons shall be 
given in full , together with their nationality and such other 
particulars, if any, necessary for their identification. 
  Signature 
 Any signature which is not legible or which is written in a  script 
other than Hindi or English shall be accompanied by a transcription 
of the name, either in Hindi or in English, in block letters. 
03.04.06  Sequence listing 
If the application for patent discloses sequence listing of nucleotides 
or amino acid sequences, such sequence list ing shall be filed in the 
computer readable text format along with the application and no print 
form of the sequence listing of nucleotides or amino acid sequences 
will be required to be given. 
A nucleotide sequence shall be listed with a maximum of 60 bas es per 
line, with a space between each group of 10 bases. The bases of a 
nucleotide sequence (including introns) shall be listed in groups of 10 
bases, except in the coding parts of the sequence. Leftover bases, 
fewer than 10 in number at the end of non-coding parts of a sequence, 
should be grouped together and separated from adjacent groups by a 
space. The bases of the coding parts of a nucleotide sequence shall be 
listed as triplets (codons). 
Any sequence listing in electronic form shall be contained with in one 
electronic file encoded using IBM  39 Code Page 437, IBM Code Page 
93240 or a compatible code page to represent the sequence listing 
with no other codes included.  
Any sequence listing in the electronic document format as specified 
shall preferably be created by dedicated software such as PatentIn.  
(REFERENCE: WIPO STANDARD ST.25 FOR THE 
PRESENTATION OF NUCLEOTIDE AND AMINO ACID. 
URL: https://www.wipo.int/exp ort/sites/www/standards/en/pdf/ 
03-25-01.pdf ) 
Rule 9 
03.04.07 Fee: 
1. Fee payable under the Act in case of offline filing may either be 
 
Section

===== PAGE 23 =====
23 
 
paid in cash or  may be sent by bank draft or banker‘s cheque 
payable to the Controller of Patents and drawn on a schedu led 
bank at the place where the appropriate office is situated.  Fee 
can also be paid through BHIM  app in Controller of Patents 
Account. 
2. If the draft or banker‘s cheque is sent by post, the fee shall be 
deemed to have been paid on the date on which the draf t or 
banker‘s cheque has actually reached the Controller.  
3. Ten percent additional fee shall be payable when the application 
for patent and other documents are filed through physical mode, 
namely, in hard copy format.  
4. In case of online filing, payment of f ees can be made  through a 
payment gateway with all the prevalent major modes of payment 
like Net banking, Credit Cards, Debit Cards or ATM Cards.  
5. When a  small entity/start up is an applicant, every subsequent 
document for which a fee has been specified, s hall be 
accompanied by Form 28 with duly authenticated  copy of the 
evidence of small entity/start up. 
6. In case an application processed by a natural person is fully or 
partially transferred to a person other than a natural person, the 
difference, if any, in  the scale of fee(s) between the fee(s) 
charged from a natural person  and  the  fee(s)  chargeable  from  
the  person other than a natural person in the same matter for all 
previous proceedings shall be paid  by  the  new  applicant  with  
the  request  for transfer in Form 6 along with Form 30.  
7. When an application processed by a small entity is fully or partly 
transferred to a person other than a natural person (except a 
small entity), the difference, if any, in the scale of fee(s) between 
the fee(s) char ged from a small entity and the fee(s) chargeable 
from the person other than a natural person (except a small 
entity) in the same matter for all previous proceedings shall be 
paid by the new applicant with the request for transfer  in Form 6 
along with Form 30. 
8. When an application is filed by a startup is fully or partly 
142, 
Rule 7, 
First 
Schedule

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 
 
transferred to any person other than a natural person or a 
startup, the difference, if any, in the scale of fees between the 
fees charged from a startup and such person to whom the 
application is transferred, shall be paid by the new applicant for 
all previous proceedings along with the request for transfer  in 
Form 6 along with Form 30. 
Explanation- Where the startup ceases to be a startup after 
having filed an application for patent due to l apse of more 
than seven/ten years from the date of its incorporation or 
registration as applicable  or the turnover subsequently 
crosses the financial threshold limit as defined, no such 
difference in the scale of fees shall be payable.  
9. Where a fee is payab le in respect of a document, the entire fee 
shall accompany the document. 
10. Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the 
Controller, the Controller shall not do that act until the fee has 
been paid. 
11. Fee once paid in respect of any proceedi ngs shall not be 
ordinarily refunded whether the proceedings have taken place or 
not. However, on the request by the applicant/agent in Form 30 
and if the Controller is satisfied that during the online filing 
process, the fee was paid more than once for th e same 
proceeding, the excess fee shall be refunded.  
12. Prescribed fee for various proceedings under the Act is given in 
the First Schedule. 
03.05 Processing of Application  
03.05.01 Initial  processing:  
1. On receipt of an application, the Office accords a date and serial 
number to it. Requests for examination are accorded separate serial 
numbers. 
2. Applications and other documents filed in physical form are digitized, 
verified, screened, classified and uploaded to the internal server of the 
Office. 
3. Patent applications and other documents  are arranged in  e-wrapper.

===== PAGE 25 =====
25 
 
4. The Application is screened for: 
a. International Patent Classification 
b. Technical field of invention for allocation to an examiner in 
the respective field 
c. Relevance to defence or atomic energy. 
d.      Correctness and completeness of abstract. 
        If the abstract is found as not appropriate , the same  will be 
amended suitably by the office , so as to provide better 
information to third parties. However, care is taken that such 
amendment does not result in a change in the nature of 
invention. 
03.05.02   i.     Numbering System for Applications 
•  FORMAT:  YYYY J T NNNNNN , Where, 
•  "YYYY" is Four  digit fixed length “Year of filing”  
        ( in YYYY/MM/DD )  
• "J"  is   fixed  length  single  digit  “Jurisdiction”   in  numerals  
(1 for  Delhi,  2 for Mumbai, 3 for Kolkata, 4 for Chennai) 
• "T" is fixed length single digit "Type of Application"in 
numerals: 
       (1 for Ordinary; 2 for Ordinary -Divisional;3 for Ord inary-Patent 
of Addition; 4 for Convention; 5 for Convention -Divisional; 6 
for Convention -Patent of Addition; 7 for PCT NP;  8 for PCT 
NP-Divisional and 9 for PCT NP-Patent of  Addition) 
• "NNNNNN" is 6 digits fixed length common continuous 
running serial number of applications applicable for all Patent 
Offices in  India  
• Thus, 1st application (Ordinary) filed in Delhi in 2019 will be 
numbered as 201911000001. 
      If 2nd application in 2019 is "Convention‖ application from 
Mumbai it would be numbered as 201924000002.

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 
 
03.05.03 ii.     Numbering Format for Request for Examination 
• Format: RYYYYJNNNNNN, Where,  
• "R" denotes Request for examination u/r 24B(1)(i) "YYYY" 
denotes four digit fixed length "Year of filing"  
• "J" denotes Jurisdiction for Patent Applicati on against which 
Request of Examination has been filed 
• "NNNNNN" denotes 6 digits fixed length common 
continuous running serial number applicable for all Patent 
Offices in India. 
iii.    Numbering Format for Request for Expedited  Examination 
• Format: EYYYYJNNNNNN 
      Where, "E denotes Request for Expedited Examination under rule 
24 (C ). 
 
03.05.04 Scrutiny of Application 
1. The O ffice checks wh ether the Applic ation h as b een filed in 
Appropriate Ju risdiction (see 03.02). The address for service 
shall mandator ily include e -mail address and PIN code. If the 
address for service is not complete, the application shall be 
returned and the applicant will be informed accordingly.  
2. The Office checks for Proof of Right to file the application (See 
03.04). If proof of right is not filed along with the application, the 
same shall be filed within a period of six months from the date of 
filing of the application. Oth erwise, the applicant shall  file the 
same along with a p etition under Rule 137/138. The O ffice 
checks whether the application and other do cuments have been 
filed in the p rescribed f ormat i.e. p rescribed fo rms, requ est, 
petitions, assignment deeds, translation etc. 
3. Further,  the Office checks whether: 
a. the documents have been prepared on a proper sized paper 
and typed in appropriate font with proper spacing, 
b. the documents are duly signed 
c. abstract, drawings (if any) have been filed in proper format 
d. meaningful claim(s) are present in a complete specification,

===== PAGE 27 =====
27 
 
e.  whether authoristion of an Agent in Form 26 or in the 
form o f a power of attorney is filed within a period of 
three months from the date of filing of such application or 
document.  
f.      whether Form-5 has been filed, if required. 
g.    whether the invention h as been assigned to another person, 
and if yes,  wheth er  Form 6 has been duly filed along with 
the deed of assignment. If the ri ght is assigned from an 
individual to a leg al entity, the leg al entity is inv ited to p ay 
the balance fees. 
03.05.05 Secrecy Directions and consequences thereof- 
1. If in the opin ion of t he Controll er, an invention p ertains to a 
subject matter relevant for the p urpose of d efence, as notified by 
the Central Government, or otherwise the invention appears  to 
the Controller to be so relevant, he will is sue directions prohibiting 
the publication of the application and will notify the applicant. 
2. Where the Controller gives any such direction, he shall ref er the 
matter to the Central Government for consideration as to whether 
the publication of the application would be prejudicial to the 
defence of India. 
3.    If the Central Government, after considering the merits of the 
secrecy direction, is of the opinion that the publication of the 
invention would not so prejudice, will give notice to the Controller 
to that effect,  who shall thereupon revoke the directions and notify 
the applicant accordingly.  
4.    The Central Government reviews the continuation of secrecy 
directions in the following circumstances: 
       i)     periodically at an interval of six months, or  
     ii)    on a request made  by the applicant. If the applicant  requests 
for reconsideration of the secrecy direction already imposed, 
and, if the s ame is found r easonable by t he Controll er, he 
shall request the Central Government for review.  
              If on such reconsideratio n, it appears to the Central 
Government that the publication of the invention would no 
Section 
35, 36, 37, 
38 
Rule 72

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 
 
longer be prejudicial to the defence of India, it shall forthwith 
give notice to the Controller to revoke the direction and the 
Controllers shall thereupon revoke the di rections previously 
given by him. 
      iii)    In case the application filed by a foreign applicant is found to 
be relevant for defence purposes by the Central 
Government but published outside India, it shall give notice 
to the Controller to revoke the di rections previously given 
by him. 
The result of every re -consideration under sub -section 36 (1), 
shall be communicated to the applicant within 15 days of the 
receipt of the notice by the Controller. 
5.   If the C entral Government is of the opin ion that an invention in 
respect of which the Controll er has not i mposed a s ecrecy 
direction and is relevant for defence purposes, it may  at any time 
before the grant of the patent notify  the Controller to that effect. 
Thereupon, the Controll er invokes the p rovisions of Se ction 
35(1) and notify the Central Government accordingly. 
6.   So long as any dir ections und er Section 35 are in fo rce, the 
Controller s hall not take a d ecision on grant/refusal of the 
application. However, the application may, subject to the 
directions, proceed up to the stage of " in order for grant", but 
the application and the specification found to be in order for 
grant of the patent shall not be published, and no patent shall be 
granted in pursuance of that application. Further, no appeal  shall 
lie from any order of the Controller passed in respect thereof. 
7.    Where an application is found to be in order for grant of the 
patent during the continuance in force of the directions, then- 
        (a)   if, any use of the invention is made by or on  behalf of, or to 
the order of the Government, the provisions of sections  
100, 101 and 103 shall apply in relation to that use, as if the  
patent had been granted for the invention; and,  
(b)  if it appears to the Central Government that the applicant for 
the patent has suffered hardship by reason of the

===== PAGE 29 =====
29 
 
continuance in force of the directions, the Central 
Government may make to him such payment (if any) by way 
of solatium as appears to the Central Government to be 
reasonable having regard to the novelty and  utility of the 
invention and the purpose for which it is designed, and to 
any other relevant circumstances. 
 (c)   Where a patent is granted in pursuance of an application in 
respect of which directions have been given under section 
35, no renewal fee sha ll be payable in respect of any period 
during which those directions were in force. 
03.05.06 Inventions  relating to Atomic Energy 
1. No Patent  is granted  in respect  of an  invention  relating to  
atomic energy falling with in sub-section (1)  of S ection 20 of  the 
Atomic Energy Act, 1962. 
2. According to Section 20(1) of Atomic Energy Act, atomic energy 
means energy released from atomic nuclei as a result  of any process 
including  the fission and fusion processes. Under th is Act, 
"prescribed substances" means any subs tance including any m ineral   
which   the   C entral Gov ernment may, by no tification, prescribe, 
being a subs tance which in its opinion is or may be  used for the  
production or use of atomic energy or  research. 
The updated list of ―prescribed substances‖ under Atomic Energy Act 
1962, published vide notification dated 28 thApril, 2016,  may be 
accessed at http://dae.nic.in/writereaddata/Prescribed-eng.pdf 
3. Upon screening, if an Application is found to be f alling within the 
purview of the Atomic Energy A ct, the Controll er refers the 
Application to the Central Government. 
4. The Central Government upon consideration may issue a direction to 
the Controller, which is final . The same shall  be informed to the 
applicant. 
5. The opinion of the Central Government is not open to an appeal. 
Section 4 
of the 
Patents 
Act, 1970; 
 
Section 2 
of the 
Atomic 
Energy 
Act, 
1962. 
S.O.61(E) 
03.06 Withdrawal of patent application 
The applicant may, at any time after filing the application but before the 
grant of a patent, withdraw the application by making a request in 
Section11
A 
(3)(c),

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 
 
writing. A request for withdrawing the application under sub -section 
(4) of section 11B shall be made in Form 29. 
However, if the applicant makes a request for withdrawal within 15 
months from the date of filing or priority of the application, 
whichever is earlier, the application will not be published.  
Withdrawal and Refund of Fees :  
If request for withdrawal of an application is  filed in respect of which 
a request for examination has been filed but FER has not been issued, 
90% of the fee paid for request for examination/expedited 
examination can be refunded as prescribed in the First Schedule, on a 
request made by the applicant in Form 29. 
11B(4), 
Rule 7(4A) 
and 26, 
Form 29, 
First 
Schedule

===== PAGE 31 =====
31 
 
Chapter – 4 : Publication of Application 
04.01 Publication of Patent Application 
a) An application for Patent is not open to public before the expiry 
of 18 mon ths from the date of filing or date of priority, 
whichever is earlier. 
b) At the end of the period as mentioned in para (a) above, the 
Application is published in the Official Journal except in the 
cases, where: 
i. Secrecy direction u/s 35 is in force. 
ii. Application is abandoned u/s 9  (1) (i.e., complete 
Specification not filed within twelve months from the date 
of filing of Provisional Specification). 
iii. Application is withdrawn  three  months  prior  to  the due 
date of publication, i.e., before the end of 15th   mo nth  
from  the  date  of  filing  or priority, whichever is earlier. 
c)  The Patent Office publishes applications in the official e-Journal, 
ordinarily within one month from the date of expiry of the period 
as specified in para (a) above.  
d)   Where a secrecy direction has been given, then the application will 
be published after the expiry of the period as mentioned in para 
(a) above or when the secrecy direction has ceased to operate, 
whichever is later.  
e)   Publication of application under sub-sections (2) and (5) of section 
11A shall be identified by the letter 'A' along with the number of 
application. 
 
Section 
11A, 
Rule 24 
 
04.02 Early Publication 
a) A request for early publication may be made in Form -9 with the 
prescribed fee. 
b) Such a request will be consi dered only if the Complete 
specification has been filed in the instant case. 
c) Further, a patent application shall not be considered for early 
publication if an invention  pertains to subject matter relevant for 
Section11-
A(2),  
Rule 24-A,  
 Form-9,  
First 
Schedule

===== PAGE 32 =====
32 
 
defence  purpose.  
d)  The application is publ ished within one month from the date of 
such request. 
 
04.03  Particulars of Publication 
The Patent Office Journal is published on every Friday with the 
following particulars in respect of application: 
i. Application number 
ii. Country 
iii. Date of filing 
iv. Publication date 
v. Title of invention 
vi. International Patent Classification 
vii. Priority details like priority document number, priority date, 
Priority country, International Application No. and Filing date, 
etc.  
viii. Name and address of the applicant 
ix. Name of the inventor(s) 
x. Reference in respect of Patent of Addition shall be  the 
application number and filing date  of the main application. 
xi. Reference in respect of Divisional Application shall be the 
application number and filin g date of the of the first mentioned  
application. 
xii. Abstract  
xiii. No. of pages 
xiv. No. of claims  
Section 
11A 
 
04.04 Effects of Publication 
a) Upon publication, the  Patent   Office   makes   the specification 
(complete as well as provisional, if any), abstract, draw ings and 
any other document s filed in respect of the application available 
to  the  public  on  its  website and copies of the same  can also 
be made available on  payment  of  the prescribed fee as given in 
the First Schedule  of Patents Rules 2003 (as ame nded), if such a 
request is filed. 
Section 
11A(6), 
Rule 27,  
55 (1A).

===== PAGE 33 =====
33 
 
b) After publication of the application for Patent , the depository 
institution shall make the biological material , mentioned in the 
specification, available to the public. 
c) On and from the date of publication of the applicati on for patent 
and until the date of grant of a patent in respect of such 
application, the applicant shall have the like privileges and rights 
as if a patent for the invention had been granted on the date of 
publication of the application: 
        Provided that the applicant shall not be entitled to institute any 
proceedings for infringement until the patent has been granted: 
d) No patent shall be granted before the expiry of six months from 
the date of publication of the application.

===== PAGE 34 =====
34 
 
Chapter - 5: Provisional and Complete Specification 
05.01  Specification  
    The Specification is a techno -legal document containing scientific and 
technical disclosure and claims for the invention which is the basis of 
rights of a patent. The  Specification, thus, forms a crucial part of the 
patent application. 
A specification may be filed either as a p rovisional or complete  
specification. 
 Provisional or Complete Specification shall be submitted in Form -2 
along with the Application Form -1 and  other documents  
accompanied with the prescribed fee as given in the First Schedule.  
 The first page of Form - 2 shall contain: 
a) Title of the invention; 
b) Name, address and nationality of each of the applicants for 
patent; and 
c) Preamble to the description: 
i)   If the provisional specification is filed, the Preamble shall  
be as under: 
           “ The following Specification describes the invention”.  
ii)   If the complete specification is filed, the Preamble shall  be 
as under:  
     “ The following specification particularly describes the invention 
and the manner in which it is to be performed.”  
Title of the invention shall disclose the specific features of the 
invention normally in not more than fifteen words.  
The applicant shall submit drawings, wherever  required. Further, the 
Controller may also require the applicant to submit drawings, if 
necessary at the examination stage. Such drawings shall form a part 
of the Specification and suitable references thereto shall be made in 
the Specification. The Controller may require the applicant to submit, 
any time before the grant, models or samples related to the invention 
for better illustration of the invention. However, such models or 
samples shall not form part of the Specification. 
Section 9, 
10, 57, 59. 
Rule 13, 
14, 24A, 
Form-1, 2

===== PAGE 35 =====
35 
 
Filing amendments to the specification: 
1) When amendments are made to a provisional or complete 
specification or any drawing accompanying it, the pages 
incorporating such amendments shall be retyped and submitted 
to form a continuous document. 
2) A marked copy clearly identifying the amen dments carried out 
and a statement clearly indicating the portion (page number and 
line number) of the specification or drawing being amended 
along with the reason shall also be filed. 
3) Amendments shall not be made by slips pasted on, or as 
footnotes or by writing in the margin of any of the said 
documents. 
4) When a retyped page or pages incorporating amendments are 
submitted, the corresponding earlier page (s) shall be deemed to 
have been superseded and cancelled by the applicant. 
05.02 Provisional Specification 
a) When the applicant finds that his invention has reached a stage 
where it can be disclosed but has not attained the final stage, he 
may prepare a disclosure of the invention in the form of a written 
description and submit it to Patent Office as a Provisional 
Specification. 
b) A Provisional Specification secures a priority date for the 
application. 
c) An application filed with provisional specification is deemed to 
be abandoned if no complete specification is f iled within  twelve  
months  from  the  date  of  filing  of  the provisional  
specification [S. 9 (1)]. 
d) If in the opinion of the Controller, two or more  provisional 
specifications filed by an applicant are cognate , or if one is a 
modification of the other , he may allow the applicant to file one 
complete specification in respect of all such  provisional  
specifications. Such a complete specification shall have to be filed 
within twelve months from the date of filing of the first 
provisional application.  In s uch cases, date of filing of the 
Section 9, 
11A (3) (b), 
17

===== PAGE 36 =====
36 
 
application is the date of filing of the earliest provisional 
specification and shall bear the number o f that application          
[S9 (2)]. 
e) An applicant, within twelve months from the filing of a complete 
specification (no t being a convention application or PCT 
National Phase Application), may request the Controller to  
convert the complete specification  so filed to a provisional 
specification. Consequently, the applicant has to file a complete 
specification within twelve mo nths from the date of first filing.  [ 
(S. 9 (3) ] 
f)    After filing a complete Specification, the applicant may request the 
Controller at any time before grant of patent to cancel the 
provisional specification (i.e. the one filed directly u/s 9 (1) or the 
one converted from a complete specification ( u/s 9 (3) ), the 
Controller may cancel the provisional specification and post -date 
the application to the date of filing of the complete specification. 
05.02.02 Contents of Provisional Specification: 
Provisional s pecification is a techno -legal document which describes 
the invention and it is followed by a complete specification. 
a) A provisional specification shall essentially contain the title and 
description of the invention. 
It is advi sable not to include claims  in the provisional 
specification as the purpose of filing a provisional specification 
is to claim a priority date and it is only meant for describing the 
invention. 
b) The description starts from the second page with the field of 
invention, background of the invention, object of the invention 
and statement of the invention. 
c) It is advisable to include as much information  as the applicant 
has in a provisional specification, at the time of filing. 
d) It may be noted that a provisional specification cannot be filed 
in case of a Divisional, Convention or PCT National Phase 
Application.  
 
Section 10

===== PAGE 37 =====
37 
 
05.03 Complete Specification 
Complete Specification is a techno -legal document which fully and 
particularly describes the invention and disclose s the best method of 
performing the invention. 
As a complete s pecification is an important document in the patent 
proceedings, it is advised that it should be drafted with utmost care 
without any ambiguity. 
It is mandatory on the part of applicant to discl ose fully and 
particularly various features constituting the invention. Disclosure of 
invention in a complete specification must be such that a person of 
average skill and average knowledge in India should be able to 
perform the invention based on what is disclosed in the specification. 
Section 10 
05.03.01 Contents of Complete Specification 
Every complete specification shall: 
a) fully   and   particularly   describe   the   invention   and   its 
operation or use and the method by which it is performed; 
b) disclose the best method of performing the invention which is 
known to the applicant for which he is entitled to claim 
protection; 
c) end with a claim or set of claims defining the scope of the 
invention for which the protection is claimed; 
d) make reference to deposi t of the biological material in the 
international depository authority, if applicable;  
e) disclose the source and geographical origin of biological material   
specified   in   the   Specification; 
f) be accompanied by an abstract; and 
g) not include irrelevant or other matter, not necessary for 
elucidation of the invention, from the title, description, claims 
and drawings.  
h)   in case of a specification for  Divisional  Application, shall contain 
specific reference to the number of original application from 
which the divisional application is made.  
i)    in case of a  specification for Patent of Addition , shall contain a 
specific reference to the number of main patent or application  
Section 
10(4)

===== PAGE 38 =====
38 
 
for patent, as the case may be, and a definite statement that 
invention comprises an improvement in or a modification of the 
invention claimed in the specification of the main patent granted 
or applied for. 
05.03.02 National phase applications 
In case of national phase applications, the title, description,  drawings, 
abstract and claims filed with the international application are taken as 
a complete specification.  An application corresponding to an 
International application filed under PCT may be made in Form-1. 
However, the applicant, while filing such application corres ponding to 
an international application designating India, may delete a claim, in 
accordance with the provisions contained in rule 14.  
(For further details of the PCT National Phase Applications, 
please see Chapter 7) 
Section 
10(4A),  
Rule 20(1) 
 
05.03.03 Title of invention 
The title should be sufficiently indicative of the subject matter of the 
invention and shall disclose the specific features of the invention. It 
need not be the same as the preamble of the main claim. It shall be 
brief, free from fancy  expressions or ambiguity and as precise and 
definite  as  possible,  but  it  need  not  go  into  the  details  of  the 
invention itself. Title should not ordinarily exceed fifteen words. 
Rule 
13(7)(a) 
05.03.04 Field of invention and use of invention 
The description should preferably begin with a general statement of 
the invention so as to indicate briefly the subject matter to which the 
invention relates, e.g. ―This invention relates to …………………‖. 
Thereafter, the advantages of the invention may be mentio ned to 
bring out clearly the areas of application and preferable use of the 
invention. The applicant may substantiate industrial applicability of the 
invention in this part. 
 
05.03.05  Prior art and Problem to be solved 
 This part should generally indicate the status of technology in the field 
of invention with reference to developments in the field  including 
patents and pending patent applications in the specific art. When the 
invention relates to improvement over the existing product or process,

===== PAGE 39 =====
39 
 
a short statement of the closest prior art known to the applicant in that 
respect shall also be given. However, the description should fully and 
particularly describe the invention by clearly distinguishing it from  
such  closest prior art, known to the applicant. 
05.03.06 Objects of invention 
The purpose of this part is to clearly bring out the objectives to be 
achieved by the invention. It shall clearly mention the technical 
problems associated with the existing technology and the solution for 
that, bringing ou t the differences between the claimed invention and 
the prior art. The solution sought by the invention should be clearly 
brought out as object(s) of inventions with statements like , 
―The principal object of this invention is……………‖,   
―Another object of this invention is ……………..‖, 
―A further object of this invention is ………….‖ etc. 
 
05.03.07 Summary of invention 
The description should include a summary of invention before giving 
details of the invention and the method of performing it. The 
statement should  clearly set forth the distinguishing features of the 
invention for which protection is desired.  This part is intended to 
declare different aspects of the invention. 
 
05.03.08 Brief Description of Drawings, if any 
Drawing(s), if form (s) a part of the spe cification, shall be enlisted 
properly.  
 
05.03.09 Detailed Description of invention 
a) Description of an invention is required to be furnished in 
sufficient detail so as to give a complete picture of the invention 
and follows the Summary of invention. The n ature of 
improvements or modifications effected with respect to the prior 
art should be clearly and sufficiently descri bed. It may include 
examples/drawings or both for clearly describing and ascertaining 
the nature of invention. Examples must be included in the 
description, especially in the case of chemical related inventions. 
b)   Disclosure of invention in a complete specification must be such 
that a person of average skill and average knowledge in India

===== PAGE 40 =====
40 
 
should be able to perform the invention based on what is disclosed 
in the specification. 
c)    Reference to the drawings should be specific and preferably in  the 
following form: “This invention is illustrated with the help of the 
accompanying drawings......” 
d)   The Specification in respect of Patent of Addition should contain at 
the beginning of the description, a definite statement indicating an 
improvement in or modification of the original invention and the 
serial number of the Application for Patent in respect of the 
original invention. The Specific ations should also contain a short 
statement of the invention as disclosed in the earlier Specification. 
e)    Terms in other languages, if any, used in the description should be 
accompanied by their English equivalents. The use of vague words, 
slang and colloquialisms is objectionable and shall be avoided. 
f)   In case a biological material described in the specification is not 
available to the public and cannot be described adequately as per 
the provisions of the Act, such material shall be deposited with  the 
International Depository Authority under the Budapest Treaty, on 
or before the date of filing.  
g)     The International Depository Authority in  India are :  
 Microbial Type Culture Co llection and Gene Bank 
(MTCC) Chandigarh. 
For further information o n Microbial Type Culture Collection 
and Gene Bank (MTCC) please visit - 
https://mtccindia.res.in/ 
 Microbial Culture Collection (MCC), Pune  
For further information on NCCS please visit - 
http://www.nccs.res.in/g) R eference to such biological 
material shall be made in the Specification within three 
months from the date of filing, giving all the available 
characteristics of the material required for it to be correctly 
identified o r indicated including the name, address of the 
depository institution and the date and number of the deposit 
of the material at the institution.

===== PAGE 41 =====
41 
 
h)    If there is any request for early publication, then the said reference 
shall be given on or before the date of filing of such request. 
i)     Further, the source and geographical origin of the biological 
material specified in   the   Specification   shall   also   be disclosed. 
 j)    Access to the material in the depository institution is available only 
after the date of application for patent in India. 
 k)   In the case of Biotechnology related inventions, reference to the 
relevant sequence ID (SEQ ID) , if any, shall be mentioned in the 
description/claims of the specification. 
05.03.10 Drawings 
a) Drawings or sketches, which require a special illustration of the 
invention, shall not appear in the description itself. Such drawings 
shall be on separate sheet(s). 
b) Drawings shall be prepared neatly and clearly on durable paper 
sheet. 
c) Drawings shall be on standard A 4 size sheets with a clear margin 
of at least 4 cm on the top and left hand and 3 cm at the bottom 
and right hand of every sheet. 
d) Drawings shall be on a scale sufficiently large to show the 
inventions clearly and dimensions shall not be marked on the 
drawings. 
e) Drawings shall be sequentially or systema tically numbered and 
shall bear - 
i. in the left hand top corner, the name of the applicant; 
ii. in the right hand top corner, the number of the sheets of 
drawings,  and  the consecutive number of each sheet; and 
iii. In t he right hand bottom corner, the signature of the 
applicant or his agent. 
f) No descriptive matter shall appear on the drawings except in the 
flow diagrams. 
Rule 15 
05.03.11 Abstract 
a) Every complete specification shall be accompanied by an abstract 
to provide  technical information on the invention. The abstract 
shall commence with the title of the invention. 
Rule 13 (7)

===== PAGE 42 =====
42 
 
b) The abstract shall be so drafted that it constitutes an efficient 
instrument for the purpose of searching in the particular technical 
field.  
c) The abstract  shall contain a concise summary of the matter 
contained in the specification. The summary shall indicate clearly 
the technical field to which the invention belongs, technical 
problem to which the invention relates and the solution to the 
problem through t he invention and principal use or uses of the 
invention. Where ver necessary, the abstract shall contain the 
chemical formula which characterizes the invention. 
d) The abstract may not contain more than 150 words.  
e) If the specification contains any drawing, the applicant sha ll 
indicate reference numerals of drawings in the abstract, which may 
accompany the abstract when published. Each main feature 
mentioned in the abstract and illustrated by a drawing shall be 
followed by the reference sign used in that drawing. 
f) The Controller may amend the abstract for providing better 
information to third parties. 
05.03.12 Best Method 
The Act specifically requires that the complete specification must 
describe the best method of performing the invention known to t he 
applicant, including th e one , which he may have acquired during the 
period of provisional protection prior to the date of filing the complete 
specification. 
 
Section 10 
05.03.13 Claims 
Claims define the contours of rights, if and when a patent is granted for 
an invention. Hence, claims a re the most critical part of a p atent 
application. In a complete specification the description is followed by 
claims. Since, claims of the invention define the scope of legal 
protection, it should be drafted carefully to  cover all the aspects of the 
invention for which protection being sought ; at the same time 
adequately distinguishing the prior art from the claimed invention. 
 
Section 
10(4)(c) 
05.03.14 Unity of invention and Clarity of claims 
a) Claim(s) of a Complete Spec ification shall relate to a single 
Section 
10(5)

===== PAGE 43 =====
43 
 
invention, or to a group of inventions linked so as to form a single 
inventive concept. 
b) Claims shall be clear and succinct and fairly based on the matter 
disclosed in the specification. 
05.03.15 Significance of Claims 
a) A claim is a statement of technical facts expressed in legal terms 
defining the scope of the invention to be protected. No exclusivity 
is obtained for any matter described in the Complete Specification 
unless it is claimed in the claims.  What i s not claimed in the 
claims(including amended claims)  stands disclaimed and is open  
to  public  use,  even  if  the  matter  is  disclosed  in  the 
description.  
b) Claims define the boundaries of legal protection sought by the 
patentee and form a protective  fence around the invention which 
is defined by the words and phrases in the claims. 
c) Claims shall define clearly the scope of the invention with 
conciseness, precision and accuracy, so that others may know the 
exact boundary into which they should not trespass. 
d) Each claim is evaluated on its own merit and, therefore, if one of 
the claims is objected, it does not mean that the rest of the claims 
are invalid. It is therefore important to make claims on all aspects 
of the invention to ensure that the applicant  gets the widest 
possible protection. 
 
05.03.16 Scope of  Claims 
a) Claims must not be too broad to embrace more than what the 
applicant has in fact invented. A Claim which is too broad may 
encroach upon the subject matter which is in public domain or 
belongs to others. 
b) However, a claim may not be too narrow also because such a 
claim would not be sufficiently effective against potential 
infringement.  An infringer would go scot -free, if the claims were 
too narrow and hence, the full benefit of the invention m ay not 
accrue to the inventor. 
c) Having many claims, where each claim has a different scope,

===== PAGE 44 =====
44 
 
allows the applicant to have a legal title to different aspects of the 
invention. 
d) Terms of the claim which confuse the scope of the invention, or 
claim that are not specific (e.g. any novel matter) should be 
avoided. 
05.03.17 Structure of Claims 
a) The description of invention in the complete specification is to 
be followed by a ‗statement of Claims‘ preceded by the preamble, 
‗I / We Claim‘ as the case may be. 
b) Claims should start from a fresh page, after detailed description 
of the invention and should be serially numbered. 
c) Each claim should be in a single sentence.  
d) Each claim should be clear and succinct. 
e) A claim should not be verbose. 
f) The claims should relate to a si ngle invention, or to  a group of 
inventions linked to a single inventive concept.  
g) There is no restriction as to the number of claims that can be 
incorporated   in   the   specification.   Applicant   has   to   pay 
additional fee  for each claim , if total  number of claims is  more 
than ten. 
h) Each claim should be fairly based on matter disclosed in the 
specification.  
i) The claims must be fully supported by the description. 
j) A claim should be clear in the sense that it should not cause any 
speculation with respe ct to scope of the claimed invention. For 
example,  words like ‗thin‘, ‗strong‘, ‗a major part‘,  ‗such as‘, 
‗when required‘ or ‗any‘ are used in the claims, the same may lead 
to  a subjective interpretation. Where ever use of such terms are 
unavoidable and are considered as clear and definitive to a person 
skilled in the art, the same may be allowable. 
k) A claim must be specific and not vague, ambiguous or 
hypothetical in nature. Each claim should be complete so that it 
covers the inventive feature and enoug h elements around it to 
put the invention in the proper context. 
l) Any term which is used in the claim, must be either found in the 
description or fairly inferred from the description.

===== PAGE 45 =====
45 
 
m) Trade Marks should not be used in Patent Applications where a 
generic ter m can be used instead , since a Trademark is an 
indication of the origin rather than the composition or content of 
goods, However, Trade  Marks  are  only  permitted  in  claims  
where  it  can  be shown that their use is unavoidable and does 
not introduce ambiguity. 
n) A claim usually consists of three parts: 
- Preamble, 
- Transitional phrase; and 
- Body. 
o) An introductory phrase (Preamble) identifies the category of 
invention and sometimes the purpose (for example, a machine 
for waxing paper, and a composition for fertilizing soil). 
p) The transition phrase may be words and phrases such as: 
- comprising  
- including 
- consisting of 
- consisting essentially of 
q) If the invention is an improvement on a product or a process 
existing in the prior art, the invention should be characterized by 
the feature(s) comprising such improvement over  the prior art. In 
such cases, the claim will have two parts separated by the word 
‗characterized by‘ or ‗wherein‘. 
r) The first claim is always an independent claim also known as 
‗Principal Claim‘. It sho uld clearly define the essential features of 
the embodiment (s) of the process/product that constitutes the 
invention. The claim should be properly characterized with respect 
to the ‗prior art‘, defining all the technical features essential to the 
invention or inventive concept. The claim should bring out 
sufficient details of interrelationship  and/or operation to establish 
that the invention achieves the intended objectives. 
s) There may be more than one independent claim in a single 
application if the claims fall under a single inventive concept. 
While  there  is  no  restriction  as  to  the  number  of  claims, 
including independent claims, it is advisable to limit the number of 
claims, as well as the number of independent claims in a single

===== PAGE 46 =====
46 
 
application so t hat the claims are falling under a  single  inventive  
concept. 
A dependent claim derives antecedence from an independent 
claim and reads into it the features of the independent claim and 
may contain optional features. 
t) A claim shall not comprise number of alternatives and/or variable 
parameters/ features which make it unsearchable. 
u) Dependent claims that are not fully limited by the terms of the 
preceding independent claim, e.g. dependent claims which omit, 
modify or substitute a feature of an independent cl aim should be 
avoided. 
v) The practice of including an omnibus claim does not have any 
legal basis under the Patents Act. In fact, such a claim cannot be 
allowed as per Section 10(4)(c) of the Act , being   non -definitive 
with respect to scope of invention for  which the protection is 
claimed. 
05.04 Priority of  Claim 
Each claim of a complete specification shall have a priority date. 
When a complete specification is filed along with the application, the 
date of filing of the application is the date of the prio rity of the 
claim(s) of the specification if the claim(s) are fairly based on the 
matter disclosed in the specification. 
Section 
2(1)(w), 11 
05.04.01 Priority Dates- General 
a) When a complete specification is filed pursuant to a Provisional 
Specification, the priority date thereof shall be the date of filing of 
the provisional application. 
b) When a complete specification is filed based on two or more 
provisional specifications which are cognate, the priority dates for 
claims arising from each of the provisiona l specifications will be 
the date of the respective provisional specification. 
c) When  a  complete specification  is   converted   into   provisional 
specification and a fresh complete specification is filed thereafter, 
the priority date of claims shall be t he date of disclosure of the 
relevant specification in which the claimed subject matter was first 
disclosed. 
Section 9, 
11

===== PAGE 47 =====
47 
 
d) When a complete specification is filed after the provisional 
specification, the Controller may on the request of the applicant 
made any time before  the grant, cancel the provisional 
specification and post -date the provisional specification to the 
date of complete specification. 
e) If the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed partly in one 
and partly in another such previous application accompany ing 
provisional specification, the priority date of the claim shall be the 
date of the later filed Specification. 
f) Where a complete specification based on a previously filed 
application in India has been filed within twelve months from the 
date of that appl ication and the claim is fairly based on the matter 
disclosed in the previously filed application, the priority date of 
that claim shall be the date of the previously filed application in 
which the matter was first disclosed. 
g) A claim in a complete specific ation of a patent shall not be 
invalidated by the reason only if: 
i. the publication or use of the invention so far as claimed in 
that claim on or after the priority date of such claim; or 
ii. the grant of another patent which claims the invention, so far 
as claimed in the first mentioned claim, in a claim of the same 
or a later priority date. 
05.04.02 Divisional application 
In case of a Divisional Application, priority date of the claim(s) is the 
date of filing of the first mentioned application. 
Section 
11(4) 
05.04.03 Convention application 
The priority date of the claim(s) of a convention application is the date  
of  filing  of  the  basic  application  filed  in  the  convention country. 
Section 
11(6), 135 
05.04.04 Effect of Priority Date of Claim 
The novelty of a claim is dependent on its date of priority. Nothing 
published on or after the date of priority of a claim can be cited to 
destroy the novelty of that invention. 
Section 
11(8)

===== PAGE 48 =====
48 
 
Chapter- 6: Divisional Application and Patent of Addition 
06.01 Divisional Application  
06.01.01 General  
i. An applicant may, at any time before the grant of a patent, if he so 
desires, or with a view to remedy the objection raised by the 
Controller on the ground that claims of a complete specification 
relate to m ore than one invention, may file further application(s) in 
respect of invention disclosed in the provisional or complete 
specification already filed  in respect of the first -mentioned 
application. 
ii.(a) If the Power of Attorney, filed with the first mentio ned application, 
expressly authori zes  patent agent to act on his/ her behalf in 
connection with such application, including any divisional 
application(s) arising out therefrom, a copy of the power of attorney 
is not required to be filed again in case of di visional application so 
filed. In absence of such express authoriz ation in the Power of 
Attorney filed with the first mentioned application, a fresh Power of 
Attorney is required to be filed in case of divisional application. 
  (b)  If the applicant has su bmitted the proof of right in the prescribed 
manner with the first mentioned application, the same is not  
required to be filed again in case of divisional application. 
iii.   Examination of a   divisional   application   is   always   done   vis - 
à-vis the first mentioned application. If two or more divisional 
applications are filed based on a first mentioned application, 
examination of the second or subsequent  divisional application (s) 
shall be done vis -à-vis the first mentioned application, and other 
divisional application(s), examined earlier,  if any,  to avoid double 
patenting.   
iv.   The date of filing of a divisional application shall be the same as that 
of the first mentioned application, from which it has been divided. 
v.   The term of patent for a d ivisional application shall be twenty years 
from the date of filing of the first mentioned application or 
international filing date in case the application was divided out of 
Section 16 
(1)

===== PAGE 49 =====
49 
 
National phase application under PCT. 
vi.   Claims of divisional application(s) sh all be based on the claims of 
first mentioned (or earlier application for that matter) from which 
instant application is divided out and no addition of claims, which 
do not fall within the scope of said claims, is allowable. 
06.01.02 Contents 
Divisional Application(s) shall be accompanied by a complete 
specification and shall not include any matter not in substance disclosed 
in the first mentioned application. The first mentioned application and 
the divisional application(s) may be amended u pon requirement/  
direction of Controller to ensure that neither of the complete 
specifications includes a claim for any matter claimed in the other. 
 
Section 
16(2), 
16(3) 
06.01.03 Priority  
 The divisional application is treated as a substantive applicatio n and  
accorded the date of filing of the first mentioned application along 
with a separate application number. 
 The claims of divisional application shall have the same priority date 
as that indicated in the first mentioned application.  
 A divisional appli cation shall be examined vis -à-vis the first 
mentioned application so as to avoid claim overlap resulting in 
double patenting. 
 A divisional application is treated as a substantive application in the 
sense that: 
a) separate fee(s) is required to be paid; 
b) separate request for examination requires to be made; 
c) it can be prosecuted separately; 
d) it results in an independent patent. 
 
Section 16, 
Explanation 
Section 
11(4) 
06.01.04 Appropriate Office 
The divisional application shall be filed at the appropriate office o f the 
first mentioned application only. 
Rule 4 (5) 
06.01.05 Reference 
The Complete Specification accompany ing the divisional a pplication   
shall   contain   a   specific   reference   to   the   original application 
from which the divisional application is made. 
 
Rule 13(2)

===== PAGE 50 =====
50 
 
06.01.06 Fee 
For all purposes under the Patents Act, the divisional application is 
treated as a substantive application and, hence , all fees applicable to a 
patent application, shall be payable. 
Section 16 
06.02 Patent of Addition  
06.02.01 General 
a) When   an   applicant   comes   up   with   an   improvement in or 
modification of the invention described or disclosed in the main 
application for which he has already applied for or has obtained a 
patent, the applicant may make an applica tion for patent of 
addition. 
b) An application for a Patent of Addition shall be filed on the same 
or subsequent date of filing of the application for main Patent. 
c) A Patent of Addition shall be granted only after the grant of the 
main patent. 
d) When a patentee holds two patents, it is possible to convert one of 
the independent patents to a patent of addition of the other, if the 
subject matter was an improvement in or modification to the other 
patented invention. 
e) There is no need to pay separate renewal fee for the Patent of 
addition during the term of the main patent. 
f) A patent of addition expires along with the main patent. However, 
if the main patent is revoked, the patent of addition may be 
converted into an independent patent, if so requested by the 
patentee and the renewal fee for the remaining term of the patent 
need to be paid accordingly. 
g) Date of filing shall be the date on which the application for patent 
of addition has been filed. 
Section 54, 
55 
06.02.02  Novelty and Inventive step 
An application for P atent of Addition cannot be challenged on the 
ground of lack of inventive step with respect to the disclosure in the 
main application or patent. But the disclosure in main application  or  
patent  may  be  cited  for  novelty  against  the application for patent 
of addition.  
Section 56

===== PAGE 51 =====
51 
 
In the matter of Ravi Kamal Bali v/s Kala Tech  and others the 
Bombay High Court  on 12 th February, 2008  dismissed the 
defendant‘s arguments that Patent of addition can only be granted if it 
has an inventive step over the main application. 
06.02.03 Reference 
The complete specification of application for patent of addition shall 
include specific reference to the number of main patent or the 
application for main patent, as the case may be, and a definite statement 
that the inven tion comprises an improvement in, or a modification of 
the invention claimed in the specification of the main patent, granted or 
applied for. 
Rule 13(3)

===== PAGE 52 =====
52 
 
Chapter -7: Convention Application, International Application and National 
Phase Application 
07.01 Convention Application  
07.01.01 Paris Convention and WTO Agreement 
Paris Convention of 1883 provides reciprocity in filing with the right 
of    priority. India became member of the Paris Convention in 1998. 
India became a member of WTO Agreement in 1995 and member of 
Patent Co-operation Treaty in 1998. 
India became a member of the Budapest Treaty on the International 
recognition of the deposit of micro-organism for the purp ose of  
patent procedure in 2001.  It provides a me chanism for depositing 
biological material in the in ternationally recognized depository 
authorities for the purp ose of suppl ementing the description in the  
specification. 
Section 
133 
07.01.02 Convention Country 
Any country which is a signatory or party or a group of countries, 
union of countries or inter-governmental organizations which are 
signatories or parties to  an in ternational, regional or b i-lateral treaty, 
convention or arrangement to  which India is also a signatory or party, 
and, which affords to the applicants for patents                                             
in India or to citizens of India similar privileges as are granted to their 
own citizens or citizens to their member countries in respect of the 
grant of patents and protection of patent rights, shall be a convention 
country or convention countries for the purposes of this Act. 
At present, India is a member of WTO and a member country to the 
Paris Convention and a contracting state to the PCT. Any country, 
union of countries or inter -governmental organizations , which are 
members/contracting states to the above convention/ treaty/ 
agreement, are convention countries for the purposes of the Act. 
Section 
2(1)(d), 
133, 134 
07.01.03 Convention Application 
a) Where a person has made an application for a patent in respect of 
an invention in a Convention country (basic application), and that 
person or the legal representative or assignee of that person makes 
Section 
135

===== PAGE 53 =====
53 
 
an application under this Act for a patent within twelve months 
after the date on which the basic application was made, the 
priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a claim 
based on matter disclosed in the basic application, is the date of 
making of the basic application.  
b) Where applications h ave been made  for si milar p rotection in  
respect of an invention in two or more convention countries, the 
period of tw elve months referred to in  this su b-section shall be  
reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of the said 
applications was made. 
c) Where applications for protection have been made in one or more 
convention countries in respect of two or more inventions which 
are cognate or of which one is a modification of another, a single 
convention application may be made in respect of those 
inventions at any time within twelve months from the date of the 
earliest of the said applications for protection. However, the fee 
payable in respect of such application shall be the same as if 
separate applications have been made in respect of each of the said 
inventions. 
07.01.04 Documents to be submitted 
1)   Every convention application shall: 
i. be accompanied by a complete specification; 
ii. specify the date on which the first of such applications was 
made and the convention country in which such application 
for protection is sought and 
iii. state that no application for protection in respect of the 
invention had been made in a convention country before that 
date  by  the  applicant  or  by  any  person  from  whom  he 
derives title. 
2) a complete specification filed with a convention application may 
include claims in respect of developments of, or additions to, the 
invention in r espect of which the application for protection was 
made in a convention country, being developments or additions in 
respect of which the applicant would be entitled under the 
provisions of section 6 to make a separate application for a patent. 
Section 
136, 138. 
Rule 121

===== PAGE 54 =====
54 
 
 
3) be accompanied by an abstract 
4) a certified copy of the priority document, if the Controller requires 
the same,  may be filed within 3 mon ths from the date of 
communication by the Controller of such requirement. 
5)  accompanied by a verified English translation of such document , if 
the priority document is in a language other than English.  
07.01.05 Multiple priorities 
a) When two or more applications for patents constituting one 
invention have been made in one or more convention countries, 
one application may be made within twelve months from the date 
on which the earlier or earliest of those applications was made  in 
respect of the inventions disclosed in the specifications which 
accompanied the basic applications.  
b) The priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a 
claim based on matters disclosed in one or more of the basic 
applications, is the date on which that matter  was first so disclosed. 
c) For the purposes of this Act, a matter shall be deemed to have been 
disclosed in a basic application for protection in a convention 
country if it was claimed or disclosed (otherwise than by way of 
disclaimer or acknowledgement of a prior art) in that application, or 
any documents submitted by the applicant for protection in support 
of and at the same time as that application but no account shall be 
taken of any disclosure effected by any such document unless a 
copy of the documents is filed at the patent office with the 
convention application or within such period as may be prescribed 
after the filing of that application. 
Section 
135(2), 137 
07.01.06 Other conditions 
a) The term of patent of a convention application shall be twenty 
years from the date of filing of the Application in India. 
b) A Convention Application can be divided, an d the divided 
Application shall have the same priority date. 
c) A Convention Application shall not be post -dated under sub - 
section (1) of section 17 to a date later than the date on which the 
Section 
136, 139

===== PAGE 55 =====
55 
 
application could have been made under the provisions of this Act. 
07.02 International Application under PCT  
07.02.01  PCT International application by Indian applicant 
An Indian applicant can file a PCT International application in the 
following manner: 
i. If the international application is filed before 6 weeks from the date 
of the priority in India, the foreign filling permission under section 
39 has to be obtained from the appropriate patent office. 
ii. If the international application is filed directly at RO/IB or RO/IN 
(i.e. without a priority claim) , f oreign filling permission under 
section 39 has to be obtained from the appropriate patent office. 
If the applicant fails to obtain the foreign filling permission under 
section 39, the application will not be considered as international 
application by RO/IN. 
If any person fails to comply with any direction given under section 35  
or makes or causes to be made an application for the grant of a patent in 
contravention of section 39, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Section 39, 
118, Rule 4 
07.02.02 Indian Patent Office as Receiving Office and requirements: 
(a) (i)  Online filing: 
       An International patent application can be filed in Indian Patent 
Office as a Receiving Office, in request form (PCT/RO/101), 
through the e-PCT module of WIPO (https://pct.wipo.int) along 
with application body, declaration , PoA (In case of agents),  
MSME Certificate in case of small entity or  certificate of 
recognition as Startup issued by DPIIT  for claiming fee 
reduction in transmittal and priority document  fees. 
  (ii)  Offline filing: 
An International patent application can be filed in Indian Patent 
Office as a Receiving Office, in request form (PCT/RO/101), 
which can be downloaded from the WIPO website , and has to be 
submitted in triplicates along with application body, declaration,  
PoA (in case of agents), MSME Certificate in case of small entity  
or certificate of recognition as Startup issued by DPIIT for 
Section 
2(1) (ia), 
7(1A), 39 
PCT/RO/ 
101

===== PAGE 56 =====
56 
 
claiming fee reduction in transmittal and priority document fees.  
In case of both online and offline filing, a f oreign filing 
permission under section 39 shall be submitted, if required.  
(b)    If the applicant is a natural person, who is national and resident of 
India, is entitled to a reduction of 90% of international filing fee. 
If there is more than one applicant , each must satisfy  the above 
mentioned criteria. 
(c)   In case ISA/US is selecte d as S earch Authority is, the applicant 
has to submit the following documents: 
 Certificate of Micro Entity status in Form PTO/SB/15A of 
USPTO for claiming micro-entity fee reduction. 
 Small Entity assertion/declaration for claiming small entity 
fee reduction. 
International Bureau as Receiving Office 
An international patent application can be directly filed with IB along 
with the prescribed fee, in request form (PCT/RO/ 101), in 
duplicate. Permission u/s 39 is required for filing directly in IB. Such 
application can also be filed electronically via e-PCT route. 
07.02.03 Functions of Indian Patent Office as Receiving Office: 
 Receiving Office (RO)receives  International Application (IA) 
and does the following verifications: 
 Formality Check :Nationality/Residence 
 At least one of the applicants must have the right to file with 
the RO  
 The application must be in a language accepted by the RO 
(English/Hindi) 
 If formality criteria are not satisfied, then IA may be referred 
to IB for further processing. 
 Accords or refuses the international filing date (Article 11(1)) 
  Checks the technical elements of International application. 
 The application must contain at least:  
 An indication that it is intended as an international application  
 A request which has the effect of making all possible 
designations (Article 4 and Rules 3 and 4.9)  
Section 35, 
Article 3, 
4,11, 14, 
16 of PCT. 
PCT-
Receiving 
Office 
Guidelines

===== PAGE 57 =====
57 
 
 The name of the applicant (Rule 4.5)  
 A description (Rule 5)  
 A claim (Rule 6)  
 Decides on requests for incorporation by reference of missing 
elements or parts (Rules 20.5 to 20.7) 
 Checks whether translation of international application is required 
(Rules 12.3 and 12.4) 
 Checks if the required fees (RO/IB /ISA) are timely paid 
(Rule14,15, 16bis) 
 Checks priority claim(s) (Rules 4.10 and 26bis) 
 Decides on requests for restoration of the priority right (Rule 
26bis.3) 
 Specifies the International Searching Authority 
 Specifies the International Preliminary Examining Authority 
 Checks for  national security clearance/FFL (as per section 39 of 
Patent Act 1970) 
 Forwards the record copy to IB and the search copy to ISA, 
including any required translation (Article 12, Rules 22.1 and 23.1)  
 Forwards and receives correspondence from applicants and the 
international authorities  
 Prepares the priority documents of PCT applications filed with it. 
 COMPETENT INTERNATIONAL   SEARCHING 
AUTHORITIES (ISAs) (Article 16, Rule 35) 
 Indian Patent Office   (IN) 
 Austrian Patent Office (AT)                                     
 Australian Patent Office (AU) 
 European Patent Office  (EP) 
 The State  Intellectual Property Office of The People’s 
Republic of China (CN) 
 United States Patent & Trademark Office (US) 
 Swedish  Patent And Registration Office (SE)  
               Updated information is available on WIPO website  
(www.wipo.int)

===== PAGE 58 =====
58 
 
 Fees payable to the receiving Office (RO) 
 transmittal fee ( No fee , if applied through e-PCT) 
 international filing fee (for IB)  
 search fee (for ISA)  
 supplement to the international filing fee for each sheet in 
excess of 30 (for IB)  
 fee for priority document (No fee to  be paid if applied 
through WIPO DAS) 
 late payment fee 
 late furnishing fee (translation of international 
application) 
 fee for copies of documents  
    (Fees indicated in italics are to be paid only as per instructions   
from RO).  
Intimation to the applicant concerning payment  of the 
prescribed fee is sent in Form PCT/RO/102. 
07.02.04 PCT Fee (may vary from time to time) 
All PCT fees are subject to change periodically. For latest f ees, 
please refer the latest PCT newsletter at URL www.wipo.int. 
International Filing Fee  USD 1,352 
Search Fees   
(AT) USD 2,053 
(AU) USD 1,589 
(CN) USD 306 
(EP) USD 2053 
(SE) USD 2095 
(US) USD 2080 
For small entity 
USD 1,040 
For micro entity: 
USD 520 
(IN) INR 10000 (other than natural person) 
INR 2500 (for natural person) 
USD 144 
USD 36 
 The applicant can make the payment towards International filing 
fee and ISA fee (except ISA/IN) directly through NEFT /RTGS 
and submit the UTR/Ref no via email to RO/IN  
 RO prepares debit instructions to the bank and transmits the 
Rule 16bis 
of 
Regulations 
under the 
PCT

===== PAGE 59 =====
59 
 
payment subsequently to IB and ISA and also intimate the same 
through e mail to the concerned International authority. 
07.02.05 International Search 
1. International search report is established by the International 
Searching Authority chosen by the applicant in international 
application. The International Searching Authority provides a written 
opinion on patentability along with international search report. 
2. If the international application did not claim priority of a 
previously filed Indian patent application, the international search 
report is normally made available within nine months from the 
international filing date.  
If priority is claimed, that report is made available usually by 
the16th month from the priority date.  
Even where priority is claimed, the international search report is 
normally made available before publication of the international 
application. This allow s time for the applicant to withdraw the 
application before publication, if desired. 
3. On receipt of the i nternational s earch r eport the applicant m ay 
amend the claims (under Article 19) in light of the international 
search report with effect in all designated States. The t ime limit 
referred to in Article 19 is two months from the date of transmittal 
of the in ternational search report to the International Bureau and 
to the applicant by the International Searching Autho rity or 16 
months from the priority date, whichever time limit expires later. 
However, any amendment made under Article19 which is received 
by the  International Bureau after the expiration of the applicable 
time limit is considered to have been received by the Bureau on 
the last day  of the time limit if it reaches before the technical 
preparations for international publication have been completed. 
4. Such amendments save costs for preparation of different sets of 
amendments and for local Agents filing such amendments before 
Designated Offices. 
5. Indian Patent Office has been recognized as an International 
Searching Authority (ISA) and an International Preliminary 
 
Article 15, 
16,17, 18, 
19 of PCT.

===== PAGE 60 =====
60 
 
Examining Authority (IPEA) at the meeting of the General 
Assemblies of WIPO held in September – October, 2007. 
6. The Indian P atent Office started functioning as an International 
Searching Authority (ISA) and an International Preliminary 
Examining Authority (IPEA) from October, 2013. 
07.02.06 Withdrawals of International Application  
 Withdrawal of Application 
1. The applicant may withdraw the international application at any  
time prior to the expiration of 30 months from the priority date.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
2. Withdrawal shall be  effective on receipt of a notice addressed by 
the applicant, at his option, to the International Bureau, to the  
Receiving Office or, where Article 39(1) applies to the 
International Preliminary Examining Authority.                                                                                                     
3. No international publication of the international application shall 
be effected if the notice of withdrawal sent by the applicant or 
transmitted by t he Receiving Office or the International 
Preliminary E xamining Authority r eaches the International 
Bureau before the  technical preparations for in ternational 
publication have been completed. 
Withdrawal of Designations 
1. The  applicant  may  withdraw  the  designation  of  any designated 
State at any time prior to the expiration of 30 months from the 
priority date. Withdrawal of the designation of a St ate which has 
been elected shall entail withdrawal of the corresponding election 
under Rule 90bis.4. 
2. Where  a  State  has  been  designated  for  the  purpose  of 
obtaining both, a national patent and a regional patent, withdrawal 
of the designation of tha t State shall be taken to mean withdrawal 
of only the designati on for the purpose of obtaining a   national   
patent,   except   where   otherwise indicated. 
3. Withdrawal of designations of all designated States shall be treated 
as withdrawal of the international application under Rule 90bis.1. 
4. Withdrawal shall be effective on receipt of a notice addressed by 
the applicant, at his option, to the International Bureau, to the 
Receiving Office or, where Article 39(1) applies, to the 
Article 8(1), 
20 (1), 
21(2) (a), 
23 (2), 
39(1), 
40 (2) of 
PCT. Rule 
4.15 (b), 
45bis.8, 
53.8 (b), 
90bis, 
90.2(b) of 
Regulations 
under the 
PCT.

===== PAGE 61 =====
61 
 
International Preliminary Examining Authority. 
5. No international publication of the designation shall be  effected if 
the notice of withdrawal sent by the applicant or transmitted by the 
Receiving Office or the International Preliminary Examining 
Authority reaches the International Bure au before the technical 
preparations for international publication have been completed. 
Withdrawal of Priority Claims 
1. The applicant may withdraw a priority claim, made in the 
international application under Article 8(1), at any time prior to the 
expiration of 30 months from the priority date. 
2. Where the international application contains more than one priority 
claim, the applicant may exercise the right provided for in 
paragraph (a) of PCT Rule 90bis3 in respect of one or more or all 
of the priority claims. 
3. Withdrawal shall be effective on receipt of a notice addressed by 
the applicant, at his option, to the International Bureau, to the 
Receiving Office or, where Article 39(1) applies, to the 
International Preliminary Examining Authority. 
4. Where the withdrawal of a priority claim causes a change in the 
priority date, any t ime limit which is computed from                                                                
the original priority date and which has not already expired shall, 
subject to paragraph (e)of PCT Rule 90bis3, be computed from the 
priority date resulting from that change. 
5. In the case of the time limit referred to  in Article 21(2)(a), the  
International Bureau may nevertheless proceed with the 
international publication on the basis of the said t ime limit as 
computed from the original priority date if the notice of withdrawal 
sent by the applicant or transmitted by the Receiving Office or the 
International Preliminary E xamining Autho rity r eaches the 
International Bureau after the completion of the  technical 
preparations for international publication. 
Withdrawal of Supplementary Search Request 
1. The applicant may withdraw a supplementary search request at any 
time prior to the date of transmittal to the applicant and to the

===== PAGE 62 =====
62 
 
International Bureau, under R ule 45bis.8(a), of the supplementary 
international search report or the declaration that no such report 
will be established. 
2. Withdrawal shall be effective on r eceipt, with in the t ime l imit 
under paragraph (a) of PCT Rule 90bis.3bis, of a not ice addressed 
by the  applicant, at his option, to the Authority spe cified for 
supplementary s earch or to the International Bureau, provided 
that, where the notice does not reach the Authority specified for 
supplementary search in sufficient time to prevent the transmittal 
of the report or d eclaration r eferred to in p aragraph ( a) of PCT 
Rule 90bis.3bis, the communication of  that report or declaration 
under Article 20(1), as applicable by virtue of Rule 45bis.8(b), shall 
nevertheless be effected. 
Withdrawal of Demand or of Elections 
1. The applicant  may  withdraw  the  demand  or  any  or  all 
elections at any time prior to the expiration of 30 months from the 
priority date. 
2.  Withdrawal shall be effective upon receipt of a notice addressed by 
the applicant to the International Bureau. 
3. If the notice of withdrawal is submitted by the applicant to the 
International Preliminary Examining Authority, that Authority shall 
mark the date of receipt on the notice and transmit it promptly to 
the International Bureau. The notice shall be considered   to   have   
been   submitted   to   the International Bureau on the date marked. 
Signature 
1. Any notice of withdrawal  referred  to  in  Rules  90bis.1  to 90bis.4 
shall be signed by the applicant or, if there are two or more 
applicants, by all of them. An applicant who is considered to be 
the common representative under Rule 90.2(b) shall, not be 
entitled to sign such a notice on behalf of the other applicants. 
Effect of Withdrawal 
1. Withdrawal under Rule 90bis of the international application, an y 
designation, any priority claim, the demand or any election shall

===== PAGE 63 =====
63 
 
have no effect in any designated or elected Office where the 
processing or examination of the international  application  has  
already  started  under  Article 23(2) or Article 40(2). 
2. Where the international application is withdrawn under Rule 
90bis.1, the international processing of the international 
application shall be discontinued. 
3. Where a supplementary search request is withdrawn under Rule 
90bis.3bis, the supplementary international search by the Authority 
concerned shall be discontinued. 
4. Where the demand or all elections are withdrawn under Rule 
90bis.4, the processing of the international application by the 
International Preliminary Examining Authority shall be 
discontinued. 
07.02.07 International Preliminary Examination  
 Significance 
1. International  Preliminary  Examination  is  optional fo r the 
applicant and provides, in addition to the International Search 
Report, a second opinion on the usual criteria of patentability 
before expenses are incurred for the national phase (for 
translation, fees for  Agents/Attorneys etc.). 
2. Helps the applican t to adapt the international application in 
accordance  with  the  results  of  the  international  search report; 
3. If the report is negative, the applicant may decide to abandon the 
application. However, the opinions from ISA & IPEA are non -
binding on the member countries. 
International Preliminary Examining Authorities 
For an Indian applicant, the following are competent International 
Preliminary Examining Authorities (IPEAs): 
1. Austrian Patent Office (AT) 
2. Australian Patent Office (AU) 
3. European Patent Office (EP) (Only if ISA was AT, EP or SE) 
4.  The State Intellectual Property Office of the People‘s Republic  
of China (CN)  
5.   United States Patent & Trademark Office (US) 
Article 33, 
34, 35, 
17(2)

===== PAGE 64 =====
64 
 
6.   Swedish Patent and Registration Office (SE) 
7.   Indian Patent Office (IN)  
           Updated information is available on WIPO Website 
(www.wipo.int) 
Demand for International Preliminary Examination 
1. The demand for international preliminary examination shall be 
made separately from the international application. 
2. The demand for international preliminary examination may be 
made to the Indian Patent Office, Delhi, International Bureau or to 
any of the six competent International Preliminary Examining 
Authorities mentioned above. 
3. The demand shall contain the prescribed particulars and shall be in 
the prescribed language and form. The  demand shall be subject to 
payment of the prescribed fees within the prescribed time limit. 
4. The demand for International Preliminary Examination has to be  
made: 
a. Within 22 months from the date of priority, or 
b. Within3 mon ths from the  date of transmittal of International 
Search R eport and w ritten opin ion to  the applicant or the 
declaration under Article17(2), whichever is later. 
The fees to be paid by the  applicant are given in the PCT 
Newsletter which is available on the WIPO website, www.wipo.int. 
07.03 PCT National Phase Application  
07.03.01 General 
1. The national phase follows the international phase. It is necessary 
for an applicant to file a national phase application in  each 
designated country, where p rotection is sought, with in the t ime 
prescribed under PCT, i.e., within 30/31 months from the priority 
date, as the case may be. However, this time limit may be increased 
through national laws by each member country.  
2. Indian Patent Law provides a time limit of 31 months from the  
priority date. Some countries allow extension of such time limit on 
payment of additional fee. 
      For making a national phase application before the Designated 
Article 22, 
23 of PCT, 
Rule 20 of 
The Patent 
Rules, 
2003

===== PAGE 65 =====
65 
 
Office, the applicant shall: 
a. pay the prescribed national fee; and 
b. file a duly verified translation of basic application, if 
necessary. 
3. International filing date is the deemed date of filing in India if the 
applicant enters the national phase in India by filing  a national 
phase application within thirty one months from the d ate of  
priority. 
4. The international filing allows the preservation of priority f rom 
the date of filing of first application in the convention country. 
07.03.02 Basic Requirements to enter National Phase in India 
1. The applicant has to file national  phase  application within 31 
months from the priority date or international filing date of 
application , whichev er is earlier. The application with respect to 
the national phase application may be made in Form  -1.  
2. The appropriate office for  filing of national phase application 
shall be decided as per address for service in India, which shall 
be furnished by the appl icant in Form 1.  
3. Where the international application has not been filed or 
published in one of the official languages (Hindi or English), a 
translation of the application, description, claims (if amended, 
both as originally filed and amended together with any 
statement), drawings, if any, and abstract should be submitted 
along with the application.  
4. For the national phase application, the title, description, 
drawings, abstract and claims as filed with the international 
application under PCT shall be taken as  the complete 
specification.  However, i f the applicant has amended the 
complete specification under Chapter -I and/or Chapter -II of 
the PCT, such amended specification shall be taken as the 
complete specification for the purpose of filing in India . 
      In case of difference between the translation of  title as 
translated by the PCT and that provided in the verified English 
translation, the latter shall be taken on record.  
Rule 14, 
20, 21

===== PAGE 66 =====
66 
 
5.   The applicant   may   make   a   request   to   the   Controller   
for amendment  of the complete specification which was filed 
with the national phase application, as a separate request in 
Form-13, along with the application.  The fee payable in respect 
of a national phase application is calculated as per the number 
of pages and claims  as they stand in the PCT international 
application on the date of filing in India.  
6.  If the applicant makes an amendment in an international application 
before ISA and/or IPEA, it  shall, if the applicant so d esires, be 
taken as an amendment before the Patent Office, prior to entry in 
national phase. 
7.  However, at the time of filing the national phase application 
corresponding to international application designating India, 
the applicant may delete a claim as provided in rule 20 (1), in 
accordance  with  the provisions contained in Rule 14, without 
filing an application for amendment . 
       It is clarified that only deletion of claims is allowable and no 
other amendment, such as addition, revision or modification of 
claims, is allowable.  
      However, this option  as to deletion of claims is  not applicable 
for the applications filed prior to amendments of the Patents 
Rules 2003 implemented w .e.f. 16-05-2016.         
       It is further clarified that if deletion of claim(s) results in 
consequent changes  in dependency of remaining of claims, the 
same shall be allowable and no separate request for 
amendment is required.  
8.  If a change in the name of applicant / change of applicant has 
occurred after the international filing date and has not been 
reflected  in the  notification from the International Bureau (Form 
PCT/IB/306), such change may be effected by filing Form 
13/Form 6, as the case may be. 
9.  If PCT/IB/304 is available on the w ebsite of WIPO, the Patent 
Office shall  not require the  applicant to submit the p riority 
document. If not available on the website of WIPO, the  Office

===== PAGE 67 =====
67 
 
may request for the same from the applicant . If the applicant filed 
a priority document through WIPO -DAS in such case, the 
applicant shall provide the code for accessing the pri ority 
document. 
10.  However, if the applicant has not complied with the requirements 
of rule 17.1 paragraph(a) or paragraph (b)of   the regulations made 
under the PCT, he shall submit the priority document to the office 
before the expiry of thirty one months from the date of priority. 
11.  Where the applicant does not comply with the requirements of 
(10) above, the Controller shall invite the applicant to file the  
priority document or the translation thereof within three months 
from the date of such invitation. If the applicant fails to do so, the 
claim of the applicant for the priority shall be disregarded for the 
purposes of the Act. 
12.  All other formalities  that  are  required  for  filing  and processing 
an ordinary patent application shall apply to  a national phase 
application. 
13.  Processing of a n ational ph ase application  will  not commence 
before the expiry of  31 months from the date of p riority. 
However, the applicant may file  an express request for  
examination before 31months in Form 18 under Rule 20 (4)(ii). 
14.  If the applicant for national phase application is willing for 
expedited examination under Rule 24 C (1) before the expiry of 31 
months from the date of priority, he shall file Form 18 -A with 
requisite fees for expedited examination a long with express 
request in Form 18 under Rule 20 (4)(ii) with fees. 
15.  International application filed under PCT designating India is 
considered as a convention application under  Section  135  for  
which  the filing date is the date of  international application.

===== PAGE 68 =====
68 
 
Chapter - 8: Indian International Searching Authority and Indian International 
Preliminary Examination Authority 
08.01 India as ISA/IPEA 
The Patent Cooperation Treaty, administered by the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO), provides the applicant from a member 
country, the facility for filing a single international application for grant 
of patent in all the PCT member countries. It also has the additional 
benefits of obtaining International Search Report (ISR), and  
International Preliminary Examination Report (IPER) before entering 
the national phase in each individual country. The ISR and IPER are 
established according to high internationally regulated standards, by 
one of the Patent Offices of the world  that are highly experienced in 
examining patent applications and that have been specially appointed 
by WIPO to carry out international search and examination. 
The Indian Patent Office (IPO) was recognized as an International 
Searching Authority  (ISA) and International Preliminary Examining 
Authority (IPEA) under the PCT and  started functioning as ISA and 
IPEA from 15th October 2013. As per requirement for ISA/IPEA ,   
IPO has access to the comprehensive collection of patent and non -
patent literature in order  to fulfill PCT minimum documentation 
requirement, integrated search platform IPATS to enable one click 
search through the vast collection of information  and p rofessionally 
qualified and skilled Examiners . IPO has also established a Quality 
Management Syst em to monitor  the ISA/IPEA  reports. Fully 
electronic processing system ensures speedy disposal and dissemination 
of information on real time basis. 
 
08.02 Applicants in ISA/IPEA 
Applicants for PCT international applications who are nationals/  
residents of India a nd Iran can select Indian Patent Office as ISA/  
IPEA. Indian applicants choosing IPO as ISA/  IPEA include 
individual inventors, startups, research institutions, universities, Indian 
multi-national conglomerates, Indian units of foreign multi -national 
firms and foreign firms with Indian inventors or Indian companies as 
co-applicants.

===== PAGE 69 =====
69 
 
08.03 Indian International Searching Authority 
1. Patent Office, Delhi performs the functions of Indian International  
Searching Authority under the T reaty in accordance with the 
agreement between Indian Patent Office and International Bureau. 
2. The fees payable to the Searching Authority includes fees as 
specified in the Fifth Schedule, in addition to the fees specified in 
the regulations made under the Treaty. 
3. The Searching Authori ty establishes international search report in 
respect of international applications or, as the case may be, declares , 
in accordance with sub -rule (3) of rule 19B  that meaningful search 
cannot be established , in cases where India has been indicated as a 
competent International Searching Authority. 
Rule 19-A 
08.04 International Search Report 
1. The Searching Authority, on receipt of the search copy, notifies 
International Bureau and the applicant about receipt of search 
copy, with identification mark 'ISA/IN' a long with  international 
application number and its serial number and date of receipt of the 
search copy. 
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to item (i) of 
sub-rule (2) of rule 24B, the Searching Authority shall, upon receipt 
of the search c opy, refer the international application, in the order 
in which the search copy was received, to an examiner or any other 
officer appointed under sub-section (2) of Section 73 of the Act for 
preparing an international search report, in accordance with the 
provisions contained in the Treaty and the regulations under the 
Treaty, ordinarily within a period of one month , but not exceeding 
two months from the date of such reference. 
3. If the Searching Authority considers that , in accordance with rule 
19-B(3) , the international application relates to a subject matter 
which the Searching Authority is not required to search and , 
accordingly, decides not to search; or the description, claims or 
drawings fail to comply with the requirements prescribed under the 
regulation under the Treaty to such an extent that a meaningful 
search could not be carried out, then the Authority declares and 
Rule 19-B

===== PAGE 70 =====
70 
 
notifies the applicant and International Bureau that no international 
search report shall be  established. 
4. In a case where any situati on referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) 
of rule 19-B(3) is found to exist in connection with certain claims 
only, the Searching Authority indicates this fact in the International 
Search Report in respect of such claims, and for other claims, it 
establishes the International Search Report. 
5. If the Searching Authority considers that the international 
application does not comply with the requirement of unity of 
invention in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 13 
of the regulations under the Treaty, then it sends a notice specifying 
the reasons because of  which the international application is not 
considered as complying with the requirement of unity of 
invention.  
Subsequently, the applicant is invited to: 
a. pay the additional fees as specified in the Fifth Schedule 
indicating the amount of fees to be paid, within a period of 
one month from the date of such invitation; and, 
b. pay, where applicable, the protest fee specified in the Fifth 
Schedule indicating the amount of fee to be paid, within a 
period of one month from the date of such invitation. 
6. The Searching Authority establishes International Search Report on 
those parts of the international application which relate to the 
invention first mentioned in the claims (main invention) and, subject 
to payment of additional fee within the period specified in sub -rule 
(5), on those parts of the international application which relate to 
inventions in respect of which such additional fees were paid. 
7. Any applicant may pay the additional fees under protest, that  is, 
accompanied by a reasoned statement to the effect that the 
international application complies with the requirement of unity of 
invention or that the amount of the required additional fees is 
excessive. 
8. The examination of the protest referred to in sub -rule (7) is carried 
out by a Review Committee constituted by the Controller.

===== PAGE 71 =====
71 
 
9. The Review Committee constituted under sub -rule (8) examines the 
extent to which the protest is justified and, accordingly, orders for 
the total or partial reimbursement of the a dditional fee to the 
applicant. 
10. Where the applicant has not paid fees for the protest in accordance 
with clause (b) of sub -rule (5), the protest is considered not to have 
been made and the same is declared by the Searching Authority. 
11. Where the international  application contains the disclosure of one 
or more nucleotide or amino acid sequences and the sequences are 
not furnished in computer -readable text format, the Searching 
Authority sends a notice to the applicant to submit the sequence 
listing in computer -readable text format and pay the late furnishing 
fee as  specified in the Fifth Schedule, within a period of one month 
from the date of such notice and ,  if the applicant fails to comply 
with the notice, the Searching Authority searches the international 
application to the extent that a meaningful search can be carried out 
without the sequence listing. 
08.05 Time limit for establishing international search report 
The Searching Authority establishes the International Search Report and 
written opin ion or, as the case may be, the declaration referred to in 
sub-rule (3) of rule 19B within a period of three months from the date 
of receipt of the search copy by the Searching Authority, or within a 
period of nine months from the date of priority, whichever expires later. 
Rule 19-C 
08.06 Transmittal of International Search Report and written opinion 
The Searching Authority transmits one copy of the International 
Search Report or of the declaration referred to in Article 17(2)(a) of the 
Treaty, and one cop y of the written opinion established under Rule 
43bis.1 of the regulations under the Treaty, to the International Bureau 
and one copy to the applicant, on the same day. 
Rule 19-D 
08.07 Confidential treatment 
All matters pertaining to international applica tions are kept confidential 
in accordance with the treaty and the regulations under the Treaty. 
Rule 19-E 
08.08 Indian International Preliminary Examining Authority 
1) The Patent Office, Delhi branch performs the functions of the 
International Preliminary Ex amining Authority under the Treaty in 
Rule 19-F

===== PAGE 72 =====
72 
 
accordance with an agreement between the Indian Patent Office and 
the International Bureau. 
2) The Examining Authority establishes- 
a) the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect 
of all international applicat ions electing India as an 
International Preliminary Examining Authority; 
b) the International Preliminary Examination Report in respect 
of the demands filed by the nationals or residents of other 
countries in accordance with an agreement between Indian 
Patent Office and the International Bureau, upon being 
notified by the International Bureau; 
c) the International Preliminary Examination in respect of 
demands made by the nationals or residents of other countries 
not party to the Treaty or not bound by Chapter II of the 
Treaty, if the Assembly has so approved. 
08.09 Period for making Demand 
1. Demand for international preliminary examination is made within 
the period specified in the Treaty or regulations under the Treaty. 
2. In case the demand is made after t he expiry of the period specified 
in sub -rule (1), it is considered to have not been made and no 
International Preliminary Examination Report shall be prepared. 
Rule 19-G 
08.10 Fees payable to Examining Authority 
The fees payable to the Examining Authorit y includes the fees specified 
in the Fifth Schedule, in addition to the fees specified in the regulations 
under the Treaty. 
Rule 19-H 
08.11 Manner of making a demand 
A demand shall be made in accordance with the provisions contained in 
the rules, the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty. 
Rule 19-I 
08.12 Processing of demands for international preliminary examination 
1. The Examining Authority, on receipt of the demand for international 
preliminary examination, if the Examining Authority is competent t o 
conduct an international preliminary examination, assigns the 
identification mark 'IPEA/IN' and notifies the Applicant and the 
International Bureau. 
Rule 19-J

===== PAGE 73 =====
73 
 
2. In case where the Examining Authority is not competent to conduct the 
international preliminary examinati on of the international application, it 
transmits the demand promptly to the International Bureau. 
08.13 International Preliminary Examination Report 
1. Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to item (i) of 
sub-rule (2) of rule 24B, the Examining Authority refers the 
international application, in accordance with the provisions 
contained in the Treaty and the regulations under the Treaty, in the 
order in which the demand was received in the Examining Authority 
to an examiner or any other o fficer appointed under sub-section (2) 
of section 73 of the Act for preparing an International Preliminary 
Examination Report ordinarily within a period of three months but 
not exceeding four months from the date of such reference. 
2. Claims relating to inven tions in respect of which no International 
Search Report has been established shall not be the subject of 
international preliminary examination. 
3. If the Examining Authority considers that- 
a. the international application relates to a subject matter on 
which the Examining Authority is not required to carry out an 
international preliminary examination, and, decides not to 
carry out such examination; or 
b. that the description, claims, or  drawings, are so unclear, or the 
claims are so inadequately supported by the description, that 
no meaningful opinion can be formed on the questions of 
novelty, inventive step (non -obviousness), or industrial 
applicability,  
c. then the Examining Authority does not go into these 
questions and informs the applicant of this opinion and t he 
reasons therefor. 
4. In a case where any situation referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of 
sub-rule (3) is found to exist in connection with certain claims only, 
the Examining Authority indicates this fact in the International 
Preliminary Examination Re port in respect of such claims, and for 
other claims, it establishes the International Preliminary 
Examination Report. 
Rule 19-K

===== PAGE 74 =====
74 
 
5. Where the Examining Authority finds that the international 
application does not comply with the requirement of unity of 
invention, in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 13 of 
the regulations under the Treaty and chooses to invite the applicant, 
at his option, to restrict the claims or to pay additional fees , it issues 
a notice to the applicant: 
a. specifying at least one possibil ity of restriction which. in the 
opinion of the Examining Authority. would be in compliance 
with the applicable requirement; 
b. specifying the reasons for which the international application 
is not considered as complying with the requirement of unity 
of invention; 
c. inviting the applicant to comply with the invitation within one 
month from the date of such notice; 
d. indicating the amount of the required additional fees to be 
paid in case the applicant so chooses; and 
e. inviting the applicant to pay, the protest fee  within one month 
from the date of such notice, and indicate the amount to be 
paid, as specified in the Fifth Schedule. 
6. Any applicant may pay the additional fees under protest, that is, 
accompanied by a reasoned statement to the effect that the 
international application complies with the requirement of unity of 
invention or that the amount of the required additional fees is 
excessive. 
7. The examination of the protest is carried out by a Review 
Committee constituted by the Controller. 
8. The Review Committee cons tituted examines the extent to which 
the protest is justified and accordingly orders for the total or partial 
reimbursement to the applicant of the additional fee. 
9. The protest fee is refunded to the applicant where the Review 
Committee referred to in sub -rule (6) finds that the protest was 
entirely justified. 
08.14 Period for establishing International Preliminary Examination 
Report and its transmission 
The period for establishing the International Preliminary Examination 
Rule 19L

===== PAGE 75 =====
75 
 
Report shall be: 
a. twenty eight months from the priority date; or 
b. six months from the period specified under Rule 69.1 of the 
regulations under the Treaty for the start of the international 
preliminary examination; or 
c. six months from the date of receipt by the Examining 
Authority o f the translation furnished under Rule 55.2 of the 
regulations under the Treaty, whichever expires last. 
08.15 Transmittal of International Preliminary Examination Report 
The Examining Authority transmits one copy of International 
Preliminary Exa mination Report and its annexures, if any, to the 
International Bureau, and one copy to the applicant, on the same day. 
Rule 19M 
08.16 Conditions for and extent of refund 
The fee paid by the applicant may be refunded, waived or reduced to 
the extent and in accordance with the conditions specified in the Treaty 
or the regulations under the Treaty and the agreement entered between 
the Indian Patent Office and the International Bureau. 
Rule 19N

===== PAGE 76 =====
76 
 
Chapter- 9: Examination & Grant 
09.01 Request for Examination 
1. An Application for a Patent shall not be examined unless the 
applicant or any other person interested makes a request for 
examination. The request is to be filed in Form 18 or Form 18A (as 
the case may be) along with the fee as prescribed in First Schedule. 
2. A request for examination has to be made within forty - eight 
months from the date of priority of the application or from the 
date of filing of the application, whichever is earlier. If no such 
request for examination is filed within the prescribed time limit, the 
application shall be treated as withdrawn by the applicant. 
       In a case where secrecy direction has been issued under Section 35, 
the request for examination may be made within six months from 
the date of revocation of the secrecy direction, or within forty-eight 
months from the date of filing or priority, whichever is later. 4. The 
request for examination of application as filed according to the 
'Explanation' under sub -section (3) of section 16 (Divisional 
application) shall be made w ithin forty-eight months from the date 
of filing of the application or from the date of priority of the first 
mentioned application or within six months from the date of filing 
of the further application, whichever is later. 
3. The Patent Office shall not commence processing of an application 
filed corresponding to international application designating India 
before the expiration of the thirty one months from the pr iority 
date. However, the Patent Office may, on the express request filed 
in Form 18 along wi th the fee specified in First Schedule, process 
or examine the application at any time before thirty one months. 
4.   The Office will not examine an application unless it is published and 
a request for examination is filed. 
5.   When a request for examination is filed by a person interested other 
than the applicant, the Examination Report is sent to the applicant 
only, and intimation is given to the person interested. 
In the matter of Nippon Steel  Corporation vs. Union of India 
(UOI)-W.P. (C) 801 Of 2011 (0 8.02.2011): Manu/De/07/12/ 2011, 
Section 
11B, 35. 
Rule 20(2), 
20(4)(ii), 
24B, 24C.

===== PAGE 77 =====
77 
 
the Delhi High Court held that once application is deemed to have 
been withdrawn by applicant in terms of Section 11B(4) of Act, the 
Controller of Patents cannot entertain application for amending any 
portion of such applic ation. It is not possible to accept submission of 
petitioner that Controller of Patents is bound to allow amendment at 
any time, even after deemed withdrawal of such application.  The 
Court also noted that the Petitioner missed the deadline for filing 
Request for examination accordingly.  
In the matter of Sphaera Pharma, Pte. Ltd And Anr. vs Union Of 
India And Anr. on 16 February, 2018  the Delhi High Court held that 
any request for extension of time prescribed has to be made before the 
expiry of such time as  prescribed in the Rules. Therefore, even if the 
express language of Rule 138 of the Rules is ignored, the benefit of 
Rule 138 would not be available to the petitioner (who requested for 
extension of time under Rule 138 to file are request for examination in 
Form 18), as no such application for extension of time was made prior 
to expiry of the prescribed time. 
09.01.01 Expedited examination of applications 
1. An applicant may file a request for expedited exam ination in Form 
18A, along with the fee , only by electronic transmission , duly 
authenticated, within 48 months from the date of filing or Priority 
date, whichever earlier  on any of the following grounds: 
(a) India has been chosen  as the competent Interna tional 
Searching Authority or elected as an International Preliminary 
Examining Authority in the corresponding international 
application; or  
(b)   that the applicant is a startup; or 
(c)   that the applicant is a small entity; or 
(d)  that if the applican t is a natural person or in the case of joint 
applicants, all the applicants are natural persons, then  the 
applicant or at least one of the applicants is a female; or 
(e)   that the applicant is a department of the Government; or 
(f)  that the applicant is  an institution established by a Central, 
Provincial or State Act, which is owned or controlled by       
Rule 24B, 
24C

===== PAGE 78 =====
78 
 
the Government; or 
(g)  that the applicant is a Government company as defined in 
clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of      
2013); or 
(h)  that the applicant is an institution wholly or substantially 
financed by the Government; 
       Explanation:- For the purpose of this clause, the term 
‗substantially financed‘ shall have the same meaning as in the 
       Explanation to sub -section (1 ) of section 14 of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General‘s (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971(56 of 1971); or 
(i)   that the application pertains to a sector which is notified by 
the Central Government on the basis of a request from the  
head of a department of the Central Government.: 
       Provided that public comments are invited before any such 
notification; or 
(j) that the applicant is eligible under an arrangement for 
processing a patent application pursuant to an agreement       
between Indian Patent Office and a foreign Patent Office. 
       Explanation:- The patentability of patent applications filed 
under clause (j) above will be in accordance with the       
relevant provisions of the Act.‖. 
2. A request for examination filed under rule  24B may be converted 
to a request for expedited examination under sub -rule (1) of rule 
24C by paying the relevant fees and submitting requisite documents 
as prescribed.  
3. If the application is not published or a request for early publication 
is not filed , the Applicant shall file Form 9 with prescribed fee 
along with Form 18A. 
4. If the request for expedited examination does not comply with the 
requirements of this rule, such a request shall be processed as 
normal request for examination , with an intimation t o the 
applicant, and shall be deemed to have been filed on the date on 
which the request for expedited examination was filed. 
5. The Controller shall refer the request for expedited examination

===== PAGE 79 =====
79 
 
along with the application and specification and other documents 
to the examiner, in respect of the applications where the request 
for expedited examination has been received, in the order of filing 
of such requests. 
6. Provided that a request for expedited examination filed by a 
startup, as defined in Rule 2 (fb), under t his rule shall not be 
questioned merely on the ground that the startup ceased to be a 
startup after having filed an application for patent. 
7. The period within which the examiner shall make the report under 
sub-section (2) of section 12, shall ordinarily be one month but not 
exceeding two months from the date of reference of the 
application to him by the Controller. 
8. The period within which the Controller shall dispose of the report 
of the examiner shall be one month from the date of receipt of 
such report by the Controller. 
9. A first statement of objections along with any document, if 
required, shall be issued by the Controller to the applicant or his 
authorised agent within fifteen days from the date of disposal of 
the report of examiner by the Controller. 
10. Reply to the first statement of objections and subsequent reply, if 
any, in respect of an application where the request for expedited 
examination was filed, shall be processed in the order in which 
such reply for such application is received. 
11. The time for putting an application in order for grant under section 
21 shall be six months from the date on which the first statement 
of objections is issued to the applicant. 
12. The time for putting an application in order for grant under section 
21, as prescribed in sub -rule (10) may be further extended for a 
period of three months on a request for extension made in Form 4 
along with the prescribed fee, made to the Controller before the 
expiry of the period specified under sub-rule (10). 
13. The Controller shall dispose of the application within a period of 
three months from the date of receipt of the last reply to the first

===== PAGE 80 =====
80 
 
statement of objections or within a period of three months from 
the last date to put the application in order for grant under section 
21 of the Act, whichev er is earlier: Provided that this time limit 
shall not be applicable in case of pre-grant opposition. 
14. Notwithstanding anything contained this rule, the Controller may 
limit the number of requests for expedited examination to be 
received during the year by way of a notice to be published in the 
official journal. 
09.02 Reference for Examination 
1. Once a request for examination is received, and the application is 
published under section 11A, the application is taken up for 
Examination in the chron ological order of filing of request for 
examination. 
2. Accordingly, the Controller shall refer the application, specification 
and other documents related thereto to the examiner and such 
reference shall be made in the order in which the request is filed. 
3. Provided that in case of a further application filed under section 
16, the order of reference of such further application shall be the 
same as that of the first mentioned application. 
4. Provided further that in case the first mentioned application has 
already been referred for examination, the further application shall 
have to be accompanied by a request for examination, and such 
further application shall be published within one month and be 
referred to the examiner within one month from the date of such 
publication. 
5. The patent application is referred to an Examiner by the 
Controller for conducting the formal as well as substantive 
examination as per the subject matter of the invention vis-à-vis the 
area of specialization of the Examiner. At present, the Patent 
Office has four examination groups based on the broad area of 
specialization viz.:  
a. Chemistry and allied subjects. 
b. Biotechnology, Microbiology and allied subjects. 
c. Electrical, Electronics & related subject  
d. Mechanical and other subjects. 
Section 
11A, 12. 
Rule 
24B(2)(i)

===== PAGE 81 =====
81 
 
6.  The reference to the Examiner is made ordinarily within one month 
from the date of publication or one month from the date of 
request for examination, whichever is later, and is made in order in 
which the request is filed. 
7.  When an application is referred by the Contro ller, the Examiner 
makes a report on the patentability as well as other matters 
ordinarily within one month but not exceeding three months from 
the date of such reference. 
8.  The period within which the Controller shall dispose of  the report 
of the Examin er shall ordinarily one month from the date of the 
receipt of the report by the Controller. 
9.  A first statement of objections, along with any documents as may 
be required, shall be issued by the Controller to the applicant or 
his authorised agent within one month from the date of disposal 
of the report of examiner by the Controller: 
10. Provided that where the request for examination was filed by a 
person interested, only an intimation of such examination may be 
sent to such person interested. 
09.03 Examination of application  
09.03.01 Search for Anticipation by previous publication and Prior 
Claiming: 
1. The examiner conducts a search in the Indian Patent Database, 
starting from 1.1.1912, and all the available databases including 
patent/non patent literature.  In addition to the above, PCT 
Minimum documentation is searched.  
2. The search is conducted to find out any publication which may 
anticipate the claimed subject matter.  
3. Another objective of the search is to ascertain whet her an 
invention as claimed in any of the claims of the complete 
specification has been claimed in any claim of any other complete 
specification, filed in India, which has been published on or after 
the date of filing of the applicant‗s complete specificat ion being a 
specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made 
in India and dated before or claiming the priority date earlier than 
Section 13

===== PAGE 82 =====
82 
 
that date. 
4.  The search is conducted with respect to the date of filing of 
complete specification. 
5.     The examiner ascertains the following: 
a) International Patent classification.  
b) Search strategy. 
c) Keyword(s) used. 
d) Databases co nsulted for both Patent and non -Patent 
literature. 
e) Prior art findings and analysis regarding the patentability. 
f) Limitation on searc h if any, such as non -clarity of claims or 
multiplicity of inventions or any other reason due to which a 
reasonable search cannot be conducted. 
09.03.02 Novelty 
1. An invention is considered as new (novel), if it is not anticipated by 
prior publica tion in patent and non -patent literature , i.e., a n 
invention is novel if it has not been disclosed in the prior art, 
where the prior art means everything that has been published, 
presented or otherwise disclosed to the public before the date of 
filing/priority date of complete specification. 
2. An invention is considered as novel, if it has not been anticipated 
by prior use or prior public knowledge in India . 
3. For the purpose of determining novelty, an application for patent 
filed at the Indian Patent Office b efore the date of filing of 
complete specification of a later filed application , but published 
after the same, is considered for the purposes of prior claiming. 
4. While ascertaining novelty, the Examiner takes into consideration, 
inter alia, the following documents: 
-  which have been published before the date of filing of the 
application in any of the  specifications filed in pursuance of 
application for patent in India on or after 1st January, 1912. 
-  such Indian Patent Applications which have been filed before 
the date of filing of complete specification and published on or 
after the date of filing of the complete specification, but claims 
Section 
2(1)(j), 13, 
29- 34

===== PAGE 83 =====
83 
 
the same subject matter. 
5. The examiner shall make such investigation for purpose of 
ascertaining whether the invent ion, so far as claimed in any claim 
of the complete specification, has been anticipated by publication 
in India or elsewhere in any document other than those mentioned 
in section 13(1) before date of filing of the applicant‘s complete 
specification. 
6.    A prior art is considered as anticipating novelty  if all the features 
of the invention under examination are present in the cited prior 
art document. 
7.  The prior art should disclose the invention either in explicit or 
implicit manner. Mosaicing of prior  art documents is not allowed 
in determination  of novelty. 
8.   A generic disclosure in the prior art may not necessarily take away 
the novelty of a specific disclosure. For instance, a metal spring 
may not take away the novelty of a copper spring. 
9.   A specific disclosure in the prior art takes away the novelty of a 
generic disclosure. For instance, a copper spring takes away the 
novelty of a metal spring. 
10.  In a case where a prior art is cited as an anticipation in the 
Examination Report, the onus of proving that the same is not to 
be an anticipation by reason of Section 29-34, lies on the 
applicant.   
09.03.03 Inventive step  
09.03.03.01 General principle 
Inventive step is a feature of an invention that involves technica l 
advance compared to the existing knowledge or having economic 
significance or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a 
person skilled in the art. 
While determining patentability of the inventi on, an Examiner first 
conducts investigation  as to w hether the novelty of the claimed 
invention is established and then proceeds to conduct examination on 
whether the claimed invention involves the inventive step. 
 
Section 
2(1)(j), 
2(1)(ja)

===== PAGE 84 =====
84 
 
09.03.03.02 Determination of Inventive Step 
1. For determination of i nventive step, the prior art  as a whole,  
revealed during the search process , is relied upon  to assess if such 
prior art(s) disclose(s) the claimed invention. . 
2. Invention as a whole shall be considered. In other words, it is not 
sufficient to draw the con clusion that a claimed invention is 
obvious merely because individual parts of the claim s taken 
separately are known or might be found to be obvious. 
3. If an invention lies merely in verifying the previous predictions, 
without substantially adding anything f or technical advancement or 
economic significance in the art, the inventive step is lacking. 
4. For the purpose of establishing obviousness of the invention  to a 
person skilled in the art,  mosaicing multiple documents of prior 
arts is permissible, if the cited prior art provides lead to the skilled 
person to combine the teachings thereunder, at the time of filing or 
priority date of patent application. 
5. If the invention is predictable based on the available prior art, 
merely requiring workshop improvement by a person skilled in the 
art, the inventive step is lacking. 
Hon‘ble Supreme Court of India on inventive step: In Biswanath 
Prasad Radhey Shyam vs Hindustan Metal Industries Ltd  it 
was held that ―The expression "does not involve any inventive step"  used 
in Se ction 26(1) (a) of the Act and its equivalent word " obvious", 
have acquired special significance in the terminology of Patent Law. 
The 'obviousness' has to be strictly and objectively judged. For this 
determination several forms of the question have been suggested. 
 The one suggested by Salmond L. J. in Rado v. John Tye & Son 
Ltd. is apposite. It is: "Whether the alleged discovery lies so much 
out of the Track of what was known before as not naturally to 
suggest itself to a person thinking on the subject, i t must not be the 
obvious or natural suggestion of what was previously known." 
―Another test of whether a document is a publication which would 
negative existence of novelty or an "inventive step" is suggested, as 
under: ―Had  the document been placed in th e hands of a

===== PAGE 85 =====
85 
 
competent craftsman (or engineer as distinguished from a mere 
artisan), endowed with the common general knowledge at the 
'priority date', who was faced with the problem solved by the 
patentee but without knowledge of the patented invention, wo uld 
he have said, "this gives me what I want?" ( Encyclopedia 
Britannica; ibid). To put it in another form: "Was it for practical 
purposes obvious to a skilled worker, in the field concerned, in the 
state of knowledge existing at the date of the patent to b e found in 
the literature then available to him, that he would or should make 
the invention the subject of the claim concerned ?" 
In the F. Hoffman la Roche v Cipla case the Hon’ble Delhi High 
Court had observed that the obviousness test is what is laid do wn in 
Biswanath Prasad Radhey Shyam vs Hindustan Metal 
Industries Ltd (AIR 1982 SC 1444)  and that ―Such observations 
made in the foreign judgments are not the guiding factors in the true 
sense of the term as to what qualities that person skilled in the art  
should possess. The reading of the said qualities would mean 
qualifying the said statement and the test laid down by the Supreme 
Court.‖  
Hon’ble High Court further added  ―From the bare reading of 
the afore quoted observations of Supreme Court, it is mani fest that 
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down the test for the purposes 
of ascertaining as to what constitutes an inventive step which is to 
be seen from the standpoint of technological advancement as well 
as obviousness to a person who is skilled in t he art. It is to be 
emphasized that what is required to be seen is that the invention 
should not be obvious to the person skilled in art. These are exactly 
the wordings of New Patents Act, 2005 u/s Section 2(ja) as seen 
above. Therefore, the same cannot be read to mean that there has to 
exist other qualities in the said person like unimaginary nature of the 
person or any other kind of person having distinct qualities…….. 
Normal and grammatical meaning of the said person who is skilled 
in art would presuppos e that the said person would have the 
knowledge and the skill in the said field of art and will not be 
unknown to a particular field of art and it is from that angle one has

===== PAGE 86 =====
86 
 
to see that if the said document which is prior patent if placed in the 
hands of t he said person skilled in art whether he will be able to 
work upon the same in the workshop and achieve the desired result 
leading to patent which is under challenge. If the answer comes in 
affirmative, then certainly the said invention under challenge is 
anticipated by the prior art or in other words, obvious to the person 
skilled in art as a mere workshop result and otherwise it is not. The 
said view propounded by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Biswanath 
Prasad (supra) holds the field till date and has been fol lowed from 
time to time by this Court till recently without any variance….. 
Therefore, it is proper and legally warranted to apply the same very 
test for testing the patent; be it any kind of patent. It would be 
improper to import any further doctrinal app roach by making the 
test modified or qualified what has been laid down by the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in of Biswanath Prasad (supra).” 
The ―obviousness‖ must be strictly and objectively judged. While 
determining inventive step, it is important to look at the invention as a 
whole.  
Accordingly, the following points need to be objectively judged to 
ascertain whether, looking at the invention as a whole, the invention 
does have inventive step or not:  
i. Identify the "person skilled in the art", i.e. competent craftsman 
or engineer as distinguished from a mere artisan;  
ii. Identify the relevant common general knowledge of that person 
at the priority date;  
iii. Identify the inventive concept of the claim in question or if that 
cannot readily be done, construe it;  
iv. Identify what, if any, differences exist between the matter cited 
as forming part of the "state of the art" and the inventive 
concept of the claim or the claim as construed; 
v. Viewed without any knowledge of the alleged invention as 
claimed, do those differences cons titute steps which would 
have been obvious to the person skilled in the art or do they 
require any degree of inventive ingenuity?

===== PAGE 87 =====
87 
 
09.03.04 Industrial Applicability 
1. In order for an invention to be patentable, an invention must be 
capable of industrial app lication. Industrial Application in relation 
to patentability means that the invention is capable of being made 
or used in an industry. 
2. The Examiner shall assess if the claimed invention is capable of 
use in any industry or made using an industrial process . Typically, 
the specification explains the industrial applicability of the 
disclosed invention in a self -evident manner. If it is not, a mere 
suggestion that the matter would be industrially applicable is not 
sufficient. A specific utility should be indic ated in the specification 
supported by the disclosure. For example, indicating that a 
compound may be useful in treating unspecified disorders, or that 
the compound has useful biological ‖ properties, would not be 
sufficient to define a specific utility for the compound. The 
specific usefulness has to be indicated. 
Section 
2(1)(j), 
2(1)(ac) 
09.03.05 Inventions not patentable 
Under the Patents Act, 1970, the following are not inventions an d 
hence are not considered to be patentable. However, examples given 
are mere illustrations and may not be conclusive on the subject. 
Objective decisions may be taken on case to case basis. 
In addition to the illustrations in the instant Manual, the follow ing 
subject-specific Guidelines have been issued and the same are 
hyperlinked as under: 
1) Revised Guidelines for Examination of Computer -related 
Inventions (CRIs) 
2) Guidelines for Processing of Patent Applications relating to 
Traditional Knowledge and Biological Material 
3)   Guidelines for Examination of Biotechnology Applications 
for Patent 
4)   Guidelines for examination of patent applications in the field 
of Pharmaceuticals 
Section 3 
09.03.05.01 An inventi on which is frivolous or which claims anything 
obviously contrary to well established laws is not an invention. 
Some examples of a frivolous nature and contrary to natural laws are: 
Section 3(a)

===== PAGE 88 =====
88 
 
 A machine purporting to produce perpetual motion. 
 A machine alleged to be giving output without any input. 
 A machine allegedly giving 100% efficiency. 
09.03.05.02 An invention, the primary or intended use or commercial 
exploitation of which would be contrary to public order or 
morality or which causes serious preju dice to human, animal or 
plant life or health or to the environment is not an invention. 
Some examples are: 
a) Any device, apparatus or machine or method for committing 
theft/burglary. 
b) Any machine or method for counterfeiting of currency notes. 
c) Any device or method for gambling. 
d) An invention the use of which can cause serious prejudice to 
human beings, plants and animals. 
e) Inventions, the intended use or commercial exploitation of which 
is found to be injurious to public, animal or plant life or health, 
such as, a method of adulteration of food. 
f) An invention, the primary or intended use of which is likely to 
violate the well accepted and settled social, cultural, legal norms 
of morality, e.g. a method for cloning of humans. 
g) An invention, the primary or proposed use of which would 
disturb the public orders e.g. a device for house-breaking. 
h) However, if the primary or intended purpose or commercial 
exploitation of a claimed invention is not causing serious 
prejudice to human, animal or plant life or health or to the  
environment, such subject matter may be considered to be an 
invention and may be patentable, for instance, a pesticide. 
Section 3(b) 
09.03.05.03 The mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of 
an abstract theory or discovery of any liv ing thing or non -living 
substance occurring in nature is not an invention. 
a) A claim for discovery of scientific principle is not considered to be an 
invention, but a p rocess of m anufacture, based on the use of su ch 
principle, resulting in a substance or an article may be considered to be 
Section 3(c)

===== PAGE 89 =====
89 
 
an invention. 
b) A s cientific theory is a s tatement about the n atural wo rld. Th ese 
theories th emselves a re not consi dered to be inv entions, no m atter 
how radical or r evolutionary an insight they may provide, since they 
do not r esult in a p roduct or p rocess. H owever, any practical 
application of such theory in the process of manufacture of an article 
or substance, may well be patentable.  
c)  T he fact that a known material or article is found to have a hitherto 
unknown property i s a discovery and not an invention. But if such 
discovery leads to the conclusion that the material can be used for 
making a particular article or in a particular process, then the article or 
process could be considered to be an invention. 
 For example,  the property of a particular known material to be able to 
withstand mechanical shock is a discovery and therefore not 
patentable, but a claim to a railway sleeper made of such material 
would not fall foul of this exclusion, and would be allowable if it 
passed the tests for novelty and inventive step.  
d)  Similarly, finding of a new substance or micro -organism occurring 
freely in nature is a discovery and not an invention. 
09.03.05.04 The mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which 
does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that 
substance or the mere discovery of any new property or new use 
for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, 
machine or apparatus unless such known process results in a new 
product or employs at least one new reactant is not an invention. 
“Explanation:- For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, 
ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, 
isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and 
other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to 
be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in 
properties with regard to efficacy”. 
According to this provision, the following are not inventions and , 
hence, not patentable: 
Section 3(d)

===== PAGE 90 =====
90 
 
 mere discovery of a new  form of a known substance which does 
not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that 
substance; 
 the mere discovery of any new property of a known substance; 
 the mere discovery of new use for a known substance;  
 the mere discovery of use of a k nown process , machine or 
apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or 
employs at least one new reactant. 
Explanation to Section 3(d) further clarifies that  salts, esters, ethers, 
polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of 
isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of known 
substance may be considered as may be considered to be the same 
substance  and can be patentable only if they differ significantly in 
Properties with regard to efficacy. 
An Examiner investigates on case to case basis  as to what constitutes 
the difference in properties with regard to efficacy from the known 
substance. 
The complete specification  shall bring out clearly and categorically in 
the description, as to how the claimed subject matter differs 
significantly in properties with regard to efficacy from the known 
substance at the time of filing of the application or subsequently by 
way of an amendment of specification under section 59. 
After analysing the legislative history of S ection 3(d), the Hon‘ble 
Supreme Court in the matter of Novartis AG Vs. Union of India, 
W.P.No. 24760/06, commented, “We have, therefore, no doubt that 
the amendment/addition made in section 3(d) is meant especially to 
deal with chemical substances, and mo re particularly pharmaceutical 
products. The amended portion of section 3(d) clearly sets up a 
second tier of qualifying standards for chemical substances/  
pharmaceutical products in order to leave the door open for true and 
genuine inventions but, at the same time, to check any attempt at 
repetitive patenting or extension of the patent term on spurious 
grounds.‖

===== PAGE 91 =====
91 
 
It was further held by the Apex Court – 
"in the case of medicines, efficacy means ―therapeutic efficacy‖ and 
physico-chemical properties of subst ances do not meet the 
requirement of ―therapeutic efficacy‖.  
It was also held that patent applicants must prove the increase in 
therapeutic efficacy  and just increased bioavailability alone may not  
necessarily lead to an enhancement of therapeutic effica cy, and in any 
given case , enhanced efficacy  must be specifically claimed and 
established by research data.  
In this regard, in Para 187 of the Apex Court judgment, it is held 
that, 
 "..........the physico -chemical properties of beta crystalline form of 
Imatinib Mesylate, namely (i) more beneficial flow properties, (ii) 
better thermodynamic stability, and (iii) lower hygroscopicity, may be 
otherwise beneficial but these properties cannot even be taken into 
account for the purpose of the test of section 3(d ) of the Act, since 
these properties have nothing to do with therapeutic efficacy.‖ 
09.03.05.05 A substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the 
aggregation of the properties of the components thereof or a 
process for producing such substance is not an invention. 
An admixture resulting in synergistic properties is not considered as 
mere admixture . Hence,  substances like soap, detergent, lubricant s, 
may be considered as  patentable. 
A mere aggregation of features must be distingui shed from a 
combination invention. The existence of a combination invention 
requires that the relationship between the features or groups of 
features be one of functional reciprocity or that they show a 
combinative effect beyond the sum of their individual  effects. The 
features should be functionally linked together which is the actual 
characteristic of a combination invention. 
In general , all the substances which are produced by mixing  
components  or a process of producing such substances should satisfy 
the requirement of synergistic effect in order to be patentable. 
Synergistic effect should be clearly brought out in the description by 
Section 3(e)

===== PAGE 92 =====
92 
 
way of comparison at the time of filing of the Application itself. The 
subsequent submissions regarding synergism can be a ccepted in a 
reply to the office action as a further support of synergy.  
09.03.05.06 The mere arrangement or re -arrangement or duplication of 
known devices each functioning independently of one another in 
a known way is not an invention. 
In order to be patentable, an improvement on something known 
before or a combination of different matters already known, should be 
something more than a mere workshop improvement; and must 
independently satisfy the test of invention or an 'inventive step'. To  be 
patentable, the improvement or the combination must produce a new 
result, or a new article or a better or cheaper article than before. A 
combination of old known integers may be so combined that by their 
working inter -relation, they produce a new proce ss or an improved 
result. Mere collocation of more than one integers or things, not 
involving the exercise of any inventive faculty, does not qualify for the 
grant of a patent. ( Biswanath Prasad Radhey Shyam Vs. 
Hindustan Metal Industries (1979) 2 SCC, 511). 
A new and useful application of an old principle may be good subject -
matter. An improvement on something known may also afford 
subject-matter; so also a different combination of matters already 
known. A patentable combination is one in which the compone nt 
elements are so combined as to produce a new result or arrive at an 
old result in a better or more expeditious or more economical manner. 
If the result produced by the combination is either a new article or a 
better or cheaper article than before, the c ombination may afford 
subject-matter of a patent. ( Lallubhai Chakubhai Vs. Chimanlal 
and Co. (AIR 1936 Bom 99.) 
An invention claiming a mere juxtaposition of known devices in which 
each device functions independently is not considered patentable. 
Merely placing side-by-side old integers so that each performs its own 
function independently of the others is not a patentable combination.  
[As for example, a flour mill provided with sieving means].  
However, where the old integers when placed together have some 
Section 3(f)

===== PAGE 93 =====
93 
 
working interrelation, producing a new or improved result, then there 
could be a patentable subject matter in the working interrelation 
brought about by the collection of the integers. 
When two or more features of an apparatus or device are known, and 
they are juxtaposed without any inter - dependence on their 
functioning, they should be held to have been already known. 
(Rampratap v. Bhabha Atomic Research Center, 1976 IPLR 28 P. 
35), e.g., an umbrella with fan (388/Bom/73), bucket fitted with torch, 
clock and transistor in a single cabinet. These are not patentable, since 
they are nothing but mere arrangement and rearrangement of items 
without having any working interrelationship between them and are 
devices capable of functioning independently of each other. 
As for instance, in the case of an application for a patent in respect of 
an apparatus for producing metallic bellows, the hydraulic machine 
and the roll forming machine disclosed therein were functioning as 
separate machines independently of each other and as such had no 
novel feature. Hence, there is no invention when a claim is made on 
known types of hydraulic forming and roll forming machines 
functioning independently of each other. 
A new combination may be the subject matter of a patent although 
every part of the combination, per se, is old, for here the new article is 
not the parts themselves but the assembling and working of the parts, 
together. The merit of a new combination very much depends upon 
the result produced. Where a slight alteration turn s that which was 
practically useless into what is useful and important, it is fit subject 
matter for a patent.  (Lallubhai Chakkubhai v. Shamaldas 
Sankalchand Shah, AIR 1934 Bom 407). 
09.03.05.07 A method of agriculture or horticulture is not an invention. 
Examples of subject matters excluded from patentability under this 
provision are: 
a) A method of producing a plant, even if it involved modification 
of the conditions under which natural phenomena would 
pursue their inevitable course (for instance a green-house). 
b) A method of producing improved soil from the soil with 
nematodes by treating the soil with a preparation containing 
Section 3(h)

===== PAGE 94 =====
94 
 
specified phosphorathioates. 
c) A method of producing mushrooms.  
d) A method for cultivation of algae. 
e) A method for removal of weeds. 
09.03.05.08 Any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic, 
diagnostic, therapeutic or other treatment of human beings or 
any process for a similar treatment of animals to render them free 
of disease or to increase th eir economic value or that of their 
products is not an invention.  
This provision excludes the following from patentability: 
a) Medicinal methods: for example a process of administering 
medicines orally, or through injectables, or topically or through a 
dermal patch. 
b) Surgical metho ds: for example a stitch -free incision for cataract 
removal. 
c) Curative methods: for example a method of cleaning plaque from 
teeth. 
d) Prophylactic methods: for example a method of vaccination. 
e) Diagnostic methods: Diagnosis is the identi fication of the nature 
of a medical illness, usually by investigating its history and 
symptoms and by applying tests. Determination of the general 
physical state of an individual (e.g. a fitness test) is considered to 
be diagnostic. 
f) Therapeutic methods: Th e term ‗therapy‘ includes prevention as 
well as treatment or cure of disease. Therefore, the process 
relating to therapy may be considered as a method of treatment 
and as such not patentable. 
g) Any method of treatment of animal to render them free of disease  
or to increase their economic value or that of their products. As 
for example, a method of treating sheep for increasing wool yield 
or a method of artificially inducing the body mass of poultry. 
h) Further examples of subject matter excluded under this provi sion 
are: any operation on the body, which requires the skill and 
knowledge of a surgeon and includes treatments such as cosmetic 
Section 3(i)

===== PAGE 95 =====
95 
 
treatment, the termination of pregnancy, castration, sterilization, 
artificial insemination, embryo transplants, treatments fo r 
experimental and research purposes and the removal of organs, 
skin or bone marrow from a living donor, any therapy or diagnosis 
practiced on the human or animal body and further includes 
methods of abortion, induction of labour, control of estrus or 
menstrual regulation. 
i) Application of substances to the body for purely cosmetic 
purposes is not therapy. 
j) Patent may however be obtained for surgical, therapeutic or 
diagnostic instrument or apparatus.  
k) Also the manufacture of prostheses or artificial limbs and  taking 
measurements thereof on the human body are patentable. 
09.03.05.09 Plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than 
micro-organisms but including seeds, varieties and species and 
essentially biological processes for producti on or propagation of 
plants and animals are not inventions.  
The subject matters excluded under this provision are:  
a) plants in whole or in part 
b) animals in whole or in part 
c) seeds 
d) varieties and species of plants and animals 
e) essentially biological process(es)  for production or propagation 
of plants and animals. 
Microorganisms, other than the ones discovered from the nature, may 
be patentable. For instance, genetically modified microorganisms may 
be patentable subject to other requirements of Patentability. 
Plant varieties are provided protection in India under the provisions of 
the ‗Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2002‘. 
Section 3(j) 
09.03.05.10 A mathematical or business method or a computer programme 
per se or algorithms are not inventions and hence not patentable. 
Under this provision, mathematical methods, business methods, 
computer programmes per se and algorithms are not considered as 
Section 3(k)

===== PAGE 96 =====
96 
 
patentable subject matter. 
For the purpose of this clause, refer the Revised Guidelines for 
Examination of Computer -related Inventions (CRIs), 2017 . 
However, a brief  of the Guidelines is given as under:  
1) Claims directed as “Mathematical Method”:  Mathematical 
methods are a particular example of the principle that purely 
abstract or intellectual methods are not patentable. Mathematical 
methods like method of calculation, formulation of equa tions, 
finding square roots, cube roots and all other similar acts of mental 
skill are therefore, not patentable. Similarly mere manipulations of 
abstract idea or solving purely mathematical problem/equations 
without specifying a practical application also  attract the exclusion 
under this category. 
       However, mere presence of a mathematical formula in a claim, to 
clearly specify the scope of protection being sought in an 
invention, may not necessarily render it to be a ―mathematical 
method‖ claim. Also , such exclusions may not apply to inventions 
that include mathematical formulae and resulting in systems for 
encoding, reducing noise in communications/ electrical/electronic 
systems or encrypting/ decrypting electronic communications.  
2) Claims directed as  “Business Method”:  The term ―Business 
Methods‖ involves whole gamut of activities in a commercial or 
industrial enterprise relating to transaction of goods or services. 
The claims drafted not directly as ―business methods‖ but 
apparently with some unspeci fied means are held non -patentable. 
However, if the claimed subject matter specifies an apparatus 
and/or a technical process for carrying out the invention even 
partly, the claims shall be examined as a whole. When a claim is 
―business methods‖ in substanc e, it is not to be considered a 
patentable subject matter. However, mere presence of the words 
such as ―enterprise‖, ―business‖, ―business rules‖, ―supply -chain‖, 
―order‖, ―sales‖, ―transactions‖, ―commerce‖, ―payment‖ etc. in 
the claims may not lead to co nclusion of an invention being just a 
―Business Method‖, but if the subject matter is essential ly about

===== PAGE 97 =====
97 
 
carrying out business/trade/financial activity/ transaction and/or a 
method of buying/selling goods through web (e.g. providing web 
service functionality ), the same should be treated as business 
method and shall not be patentable.  
3) Claims directed as “Algorithm”:  Algorithms in all forms 
including but not limited to, a set of rules or procedures or any 
sequence of steps or any method expressed by way of a finite list of 
defined instructions, whether for solving a problem or otherwise, 
and whether employing a logical, arithmetical or computational 
method, recursive or otherwise, are excluded from patentability.  
4) Claims directed as “Computer Programme per se”:  Claims 
which are directed towards computer programs per se are 
excluded from patentability, like, 
a) Claims directed at computer programmes/set of instructions/ 
Routines and/or Sub-routines.  
b) Claims directed a t ―computer programme products‖/  
―Storage Medium having instructions‖/―Database‖/  
―Computer Memory with instruction‖ stored in a computer 
readable medium.  
The legislative intent to attach suffix per se to computer programme is 
evident by the following view expressed by the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee while introducing Patents (Amendments) Act, 2002: ―In 
the new proposed clause (k) the words ''per se" have been inserted. 
This change has been proposed because sometimes the computer 
programme may include certain other things, ancillary thereto or 
developed thereon. The intention here is not to reject them for grant 
of patent if they are inventions. However, the computer programmes 
as such are not intended to be granted patent. This amendment has 
been proposed to clarify the purpose.‖ 
09.03.05.11 A l iterary, dr amatic, musical or ar tistic work or  any other 
aesthetic creation whatsoever i ncluding cinematographic 
works and television productions is not an invention. 
Writings, music, works of fine arts, paintings, scu lptures, computer 
programmes, electronic databases, pamphlets, lectures, drawings, 
architecture, engravings, lithography, photographic works, applied art, 
Section 3(l)

===== PAGE 98 =====
98 
 
illustrations, m aps, pl ans, sket ches, top ography, translations, 
adaptations, etc. are not patentable. Such works fall within the dom ain 
of the Copyright Act, 1957. 
09.03.05.12 A mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or 
method of playing game is not an invention. 
A mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or 
method of playing game, are excluded from patentability, because they 
are considered as outcome of mere mental process. For example, 
a) Method of playing chess.  
b) Method of teaching. 
c) Method of learning. 
Section 
3(m) 
09.03.05.13 A presentation of information is not an invention. 
Any manner, me ans or method of expressing information whether 
visual, audible or tangible by words, codes, signals, symbols, diagrams 
or any other mode of representation is not patentable. For example, a 
speech instruction means in the form of printed text where horizon tal 
underlining indicated stress and vertical separating lines divided the 
works into rhythmic groups is not patentable. For instance, railway 
time table, 100 years calendar etc. 
Section 3(n) 
09.03.05.14 Topography of integrated circuits is not an invention. 
Since protection of Layout Designs of Integrated Circuits is governed 
separately under the  Semiconductor Integrated Cir cuit Lay-out 
Designs Act, 2000, three-dimensional configuration of the electronic 
circuits used in microchips and semiconductor chips is not patentable. 
Section 3(o) 
09.03.05.15 An invention which in effect, is traditional knowledge or which 
is an aggregation or duplication of known properties of 
traditionally known component or components is not an 
invention. 
Traditional Knowledge, be ing knowledge already existing, is not 
patentable. An example is the antiseptic properties of turmeric for 
wound healing. Another example is the pesticidal and insecticidal 
properties of neem. 
The Examiner conducts investigation by using Traditional Knowle dge 
Section 3(p)

===== PAGE 99 =====
99 
 
Digital Library (TKDL) and other resources to decide as to whether 
the claimed subject matter falls within the purview of this provision. 
09.03.06 Information and undertaking regarding foreign applications 
 One of the requirement for the g rant of a patent application and 
continuation of a patent is to provide information and 
undertaking regarding foreign applications in Form 3, in 
accordance with Section 8 of the Patents Act, 1970 and Rule 12 of 
the Patents (Amendment) Rule, 2003. 
 No fee has been prescribed in the Act or Rules if submission is in 
accordance to the timelines as prescribed in rule 12. 
 Similar provision, which is in accordance with TRIPS  Agreement, 
is available in the laws of other countries like USA,  China, EPO, 
Mexico, Phillipines etc. 
Provisions in Section 8 : Filing of Information regarding  
foreign applications: 
(1) The applicant shall file along with his application or within six 
months from the date of filing the application- 
(a)  a statement setting out the name of the co untry where the 
application is being prosecuted, the serial number and date of 
filing of the application and such other particulars as may be 
prescribed; and 
(b)    an undertaking that, up to the date of grant in India, he would 
keep the Controller informe d in writing, from time to time, of 
details of the nature referred to in clause (a) in respect of every 
other application relating to the same or substantially the same 
invention, if any, filed in any country outside India 
subsequently to the filing of the  statement referred to in the 
aforesaid clause, within the period of 6 months. 
 The period of six months in case of an application 
corresponding to an international application in which 
India is designated shall be reckoned from the actual date 
on which the corresponding application is filed in India. 
 For corresponding foreign applications filed after the 
filing of the statement and undertaking in form 3, the 
Section 8, 
 Rule 12

===== PAGE 100 =====
100 
 
period of six months shall be reckoned from the date of 
filing of the said corresponding foreign application. 
(2)   The Controller may also require the applicant to furnish, as far as 
may be available to the applicant, details relating to the objections, 
if any, taken to any such application as is referred to in sub-section 
(1) on the ground that the inv ention is lacking in novelty or 
patentability, the amendments effected in the specifications, the 
claims allowed in respect thereof and such other particulars as he 
may require , within six months from the date of such 
communication from the Controller. 
Recent arrangement with WIPO regarding access to  
Patent Information  
A. WIPO DIGITAL ACCESS SERVICE 
The WIPO Digital Access Service (DAS) is an electronic system 
allowing priority documents and similar documents to be securely 
exchanged between participating in tellectual property (IP) offices. 
This initiative makes the procedure simpler for the applican t, in 
that, instead of the tedious task of requesting documents from  one 
country and then supplying them to his/her own country off ice, 
the DAS system allows for electronic exchange of documents 
directly between the offices. The documents are uploaded on a 
secure platform, by a participating office upon request by the 
applicant, and can then be accessed by a different participating 
office as required.  This step fur ther strengthens the data 
accessibility of priority documents in the Indian Patent Office. 
On 12th March 2018, a public notice has been issued to the 
stakeholders informing the availability of the WIPO Digital Access 
Service under WIPO-India Cooperation Agreement. 
B. WIPO CENTRALIZED ACCESS TO SEARCH 
ANDEXAMINATION   (WIPO CASE) 
The WIPO CASE system enables patent offices to securely share 
search and examination documentation related to patent 
applications in order to facilitate work sharing programs. Offices

===== PAGE 101 =====
101 
 
can share their dossier information either directly through the 
WIPO CASE system or through the IP5 One Portal Dossier 
linkage system. 
The rationale of joining WIPO CASE is based on the fact that the 
same patent applications are filed in multiple offices, patent 
examiners can increase the efficiency and quality of their work by 
sharing their examination results. 
The Indian Patent Office started its operations as an Accessing 
Office under WIPO CASE from June 1, 2015 and commenced its 
operations as a Providin g Office in February 2018. Thus, it has 
now access to search and examination reports of the corresponding 
applications filed in major patent offices. 
   Legal jurisprudence: 
Indian Courts while deciding the petitions   on non-compliance of 
section 8 requirement by the patentee/applicant have  analyzed the 
matter. The gist of rulings by the Courts is as under: 
 the provision for revocation of patent under section 64(1) (m) 
on the ground of non -compliance of Section 8  should not be 
exercised solely and automat ically just because it exists in the 
Act, as there lies a discretion in the Court not to revoke the 
patent on the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present 
case. The said discretion exists by use of the word, ―may‖  
under Section 64 of the Act. 
 It is also necessary to consider the question whether there was 
deliberate or willful suppression and whether the undisclosed 
information was ―material‖ to the grant of the patent. The 
Court can decide the fate of revocation petition only after 
considering such issues at trial on the basis of evidence 
submitted.  
    [REFERENCES: (1)  HOFFMAN‐LA ROCHE LTD. VS. CIPLA (CS (OS) 
No.89/2008 and C.C. 52/2008 , 07.09.2012, (II) Koninklijke Philips 
Electronics vs. Maj. (retd.) Sukesh Behl &   anr (CS (OS) No. 2206 of 
2012, 6-11-2013, (iii) Maj. (retd.) Sukesh behl & anr. Vs.  Koninklijke 
philips electronics  (FAO (OS) No.16 of 2014 (Division bench order) -

===== PAGE 102 =====
102 
 
Appeal to the CS (OS) No. 2206 of 2012 (Single judge order)  ,07.11.2014 
and (iv) FRESENIUS KABI ONCOLO GY LIMITED V . GLAXO GROUP 
LIMITED &ANR (IPAB-ORA 17 of 2012/PT/KOL & M.P.  Nos. 4 of 
2013, 9 of 2013, 10 of 2013 & 49 of 2013; 27.07.2013)] 
 Guiding Principles to Patent Examiners and Controllers 
regarding  requirement  Under Section 8: 
With the successful implementation of the WIPO CASE and 
WIPO Digital Access Service (DAS) , and the legal jurisprudence 
evolved with respect to Section 8; the requirement of section 8 
mandates shall be fulfilled by the Patent Office as under: 
1. The examiner /Controller shall check whether the applicant has 
filed a statement to the effect that the stipulated documents are 
available in WIPO CASE and DAS, from where the Office can 
access the documents. If such a statement has not been filed, then 
the applicant is required to provide all relevant documents  and/or 
information, without fail. 
2. The examiner/Controller shall check and ascert ain whether the 
priority documents and similar documents pertaining to the 
application being processed in the Indian Patent Office are 
available in the WIPO Digital Access Service (DAS). If such 
documents are available, further information with regards to 
priority may not be sought for, from the applicant. 
3.   The examiner/Controller shall utilise all the facilities available in 
WIPO CASE regarding processing of corresponding patent 
applications in other countries, including access to Search and 
Examination reports, and other information available with Patent 
Offices  that are part of WIPO CASE (currently Australia, Brunei 
Darussalam, Canada, Chile, European Patent Office (EPO), India, 
Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Republic of Korea, Singapore, 
International Bureau of WIPO, United Kingdom, United States of 
America). 
4.   Notwithstanding any of the steps mentioned above, the Controller 
may seek details as stipulated under Section 8(2) of the Patents 
Act, 1970 relating to the processing of the application in a c ountry

===== PAGE 103 =====
103 
 
outside India, including but not limited to, Search and/or 
examination reports,  Claims of application allowed/ disallowed, 
Amendments made, if any, etc. n other Patent offices. 
5.  Wherever, the Controller accepts fulfillment of section 8 and 138 
requirements through the documents available in WIPO Case and 
WIPO DAS, all such documents therefrom shall be uploaded in a 
file wrapper by the office. 
09.03.07 Sufficiency of Disclosure 
Sufficiency of disclosure is yet another aspect, w hich is checked by the 
Examiner while examining a patent application. The Examiner will 
look for whether: 
a) the specification is properly titled. 
b) the subject matter is fully and particularly described in the 
specification. 
c) the claims define the scope of the invention properly. 
d) the Specification describes the best method of performing the 
invention or not. 
e) the source and geographical origin of the same has been 
disclosed in the specification  if the invention is related to 
biological material and/or the biologi cal material is used in the 
invention,. 
f) approval obtained from National Biodiversity Authority, (NBA) 
wherever applicable. 
g) if the applicant mentions a biological material in the 
specification which may not be described and if such material is 
not available to the public, the application shall be completed by 
depositing the material to international depository authority 
under the Budapest treaty. 
h) Accession Number and date of deposition of the material in the 
depository institution along with name and address  of the 
depository authority  shall be given, if applicable. 
Section 10 
09.03.08 Unity of Invention 
1) The Claims of a Specification shall relate to a single inventive 
concept. In case, an application comprises a plurality of inventive 
concepts the examiner refers to the same in his report. The 
Section 
10(5)

===== PAGE 104 =====
104 
 
application may be divided in order to meet the objection of 
plurality of distinct inventions. 
2) The determination whether a group of inventions is so linked as to 
form a single inventive concept shall be made without re gard to 
whether the inventions are claimed in separate claims or as 
alternatives within a single claim. 
3) Unity of invention between process and apparatus or means 
requires that the apparatus or means have been specifically 
designed for carrying out the process. 
4) Independent claims of different categories may relate to a single 
inventive concept  and may be allowed in one application, when 
they are linked to form a single inventive concept and are 
supported by the description.  
For example: 
a) Claims for a product  and process specially adapted for 
manufacture of the product. 
b) Claims for a process and apparatus or means specifically 
designed for carrying out the process. 
c) A mould for casting an article, a method of making that 
mould, a process of casting the article b y using the said 
mould will constitute a single invention. 
d) A locking system containing plug and socket wherein 
separate independent claims for a plug and socket may 
constitute a single inventive concept. 
e) A broadcasting system comprising transmitter and receiver. 
f) If an invention relates to a new type of spray bottle, claims 
may be directed to the spray bottle itself (a product) and a 
method of making the spray bottle (a process). 
g) In case of a gene tically modified Gene Sequence/ Amino 
Acid Sequence claims may be directed to a Gene sequence/ 
Amino Acid sequence, a method of expressing the sequence, 
an antibody against that protein/ sequence, a kit containing

===== PAGE 105 =====
105 
 
such antibody/ sequence. 
h) In case of a drug or pharmaceutical product, claims may be 
directed to a drug or pharmaceutical product, a process of 
making the product, a composition containing the drug. 
09.03.09 Report of Examiner 
1) The examiner makes a report after carrying out detailed examination 
with respect to the following matters: 
a) whether the ap plication and the specification and other 
documents relating thereto are in accordance with the 
requirements of the Act and rules made thereunder; 
b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the grant 
of patent under the Act; 
c) the result of investigations under Section 13; 
d) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
2) The examiner prepares the report after conducting a prior art search 
to ascertain the novelty, and examining as to whether the invention 
disclosed in the specification is inventive and industrially applicable. 
The Examiner also examines whether the invention belongs to one 
of the categories of non -patentable inventions coming under 
Section 3 and 4, and whether the application is in conformity with 
all the provisions of the Act. 
Section 3, 
4, 12, 13 
09.04 Consideration of Report by Controller and issuance of First 
statement of objection/ First Examination Report (FER) 
1) The Controller considers the report of the examiner ordinarily 
within one month from the date of the receipt of such report and  a 
gist of objections, if any, is sent to the ap plicant in the form of a 
report-First Examination Report (FER)-along with the application 
and specification, if required. If there is no objection to the grant of 
patent and no pre-grant opposition under Section 25 (1) is pending, 
the patent is granted at the earliest. 
2) The FER is sent to the applicant, even when the request for 
examination has been filed by a person interested. An intimation 
Section  
14, 15, 18, 
21, Rule 
24B, 28, 28 
A

===== PAGE 106 =====
106 
 
regarding the issue of FER is given to such person interested. 
3) First Examination Report  (FER) may contain office objections 
relating to: 
a) Lack of novelty, inventive step and industrial applicability. 
b) Subject matter relating to a category, which falls within the purview 
of Sections 3 and 4. 
c) Non-fulfillment of any other requirement under the Act & Rules. 
4) The applicant is required to comply with all the requirements 
imposed upon him by the Act as  communicated through FER. 
However, if applicant fails to respond to the FER within six 
months from the date of issuance of FER  or within an extended 
period of 3 months , the application is deemed to have been 
abandoned under Section 21(1)  of the Act . A communication to 
that effect is sent to the applicant for information. 
5) The period of 6 months is extendable only once for a maximum 
period of three months, if requested  in Form 4 within the 
prescribed period of 6 months, along with fees. 
6) When the applicant re -files the documents within stipulated time, 
the application is examined in a fresh manner by the examiner , 
whereupon the examiner sen ds the report to the Controller with 
his observations. If it  is found that the requirements of the Act 
and Rules have been met, the Controller grants a patent. 
7)  If the response/amendment(s) filed by the applicant do not satisfy 
the requirements laid dow n by the Act or if the applicant contests 
any of the objections communicated by the Controller to him, the  
Controller shall offer an opportunity of hearing and decide the case 
on merits. 
8)  Hearing may also be held through video -conferencing or audio -
visual communication devices. Such hearing shall be deemed to 
have taken place at the appropriate office.  
       Explanation.–For the purposes of this rule, the expression 
communication device shall have the same meaning as assigned to 
it in clause (ha) of s ub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).

===== PAGE 107 =====
107 
 
9)  In all cases of hearing, written submissions and the relevant 
documents, if any, shall be filed by the applicant within fifteen days 
from the date of hearing. 
10)  After hearing the applicant, the Controller may specify or permit 
such amendment as he thinks fit and grant the patent. 
11)   If the requirements of the Act and Rules are not complied with, 
the application is refused by the controller  under Section 15 of the 
Act. A decision by the Controller for refusal of patent shall be a 
speaking order. 
12)  No patent is refused without giving an opportunity of being heard 
under Section 14 of the Act.  
13)  An order of Controller for refusal of patent under Section 15 is 
appealable before the Intellectual Property Appellate Board. 
09.05 Post-dating of Application for Patent 
1) The application for patent may be post -dated to a date not later 
than six months from the date of filing of application for patent 
on a request made by the applicant at any time before the grant of 
patent along with the prescribed fee[Section 17 (1)]. 
a) Where such request is made before the examination of 
application, the same may be allowed and the examination 
shall be conducted with reference to the date so post-dated. 
b) Where such request is made after the issuance of First 
Examination Report, the same may be allowed subject to 
fresh examination with reference to the date so post-dated. 
2) If the application or specific ation (or drawings , if any) or any 
document is required to be amended under section 15 to comply 
with the requirements of the Act or the Rules, the Controller may 
direct that the application or specification or other documents 
related thereto be deemed to have been made on the date on 
which the requirements are complied with or the date on which it 
is re-filed after complying with the requirements [Section 17(2)].  
       While invoking the above provision, the controller shall direct to 
republish the appli cation and examine it afresh with reference to 
 
Section 
9(3), 9(4), 
15, 17

===== PAGE 108 =====
108 
 
the date of filing of such specification and documents. 
3)  Regarding date of filing in case of Post -dating of application, 
the following should be kept in mind: 
    i)  Applicant can file an application with Provisional Specification  
and then file Com plete Specification within the prescribed  
period of 12 months . In this case, the date of filing of 
application with provisional specification will be the date 
of application. 
  ii)   Applicant can file an application with Complete Specification and, 
thereafter, request to convert it into Provisional Specification 
within 12 months from the original filing date and file Complete 
Specification within 12 months from the original filing date . In 
this case, the date of  filing of application will still be the 
original filing date [Section 9(3)]. 
iii)   After filing the complete s pecification, the applicant may cancel 
the provisional specification [ i.e. the one filed directly under 
Section 9(1) or the one converted from a  complete specification 
under Section 9(3)], and may request the Controller to  post-date 
the application to the date of filing of the complete specification. 
In this case, the date of application will be the date on 
which such complete specification is filed [Section 9(4)]. 
iv)   Section 17 (1):Subject to the provisions of section 9, at any time 
after the filing of application and before the grant of patent, the 
Controller may, at the request of applicant made in the prescribed 
manner, direct that the appl ication shall be post -dated to the 
maximum period of six months from the date of filing  the 
application. 
   Therefore, the said period of six months as provided i n 
section 17(1), shall be counted from the Date of app lication 
as stated above in (i) , (ii) or (iii) , as the case may be.  
   If postdating is allowed after publication of the application, the 
fact of postdating should be published in the Official Journal to 
specify a new date of filing.

===== PAGE 109 =====
109 
 
09.06 Pre-Grant Opposition 
1) Any person may file an opposition by way of representation (Pre-
Grant Opposition)to the Controller in Form 7A against the grant 
of Patent, at the appropriate office, at any time after publication of 
patent application u/s 11A but before the grant of Patent on  any 
of the grounds mentioned in Section 25(1) with a copy to the 
applicant. 
2)  The date of grant of Patent is the date on which the Controller 
orders the grant of patent in the file. For the purposes of Section 
43(1) of the Patent Act, patent is 'granted ' on the date on which 
the Controller passes a final order to that effect on the file. 
3)   If any pre-grant opposition is received after the grant of the patent, 
the Controller shall return the pre - grant opposi tion to the 
opponent and shall intimate such opponent about the fact of grant 
of the patent. If the opponent is a person interested, he may file a 
formal post grant opposition. 
4)   A patent is not granted before the expiry of six months from the 
date of publication under Section 11A. Therefore, a p erson may 
file a pre-grant opposition within the assured period of six months 
from the date of Publication, to make sure that the pre -grant 
opposition is filed before the grant of patent. 
5)   The representation shall include a statement and evidence, if a ny, in 
support of such representation and a request for hearing, if so 
desired. 
6)   The Controller shall consider the representation only after a Request 
for Examination for that Application has been filed. 
7)   Any pre-grant opposition, if available on r ecord, is considered by 
the Controller along with the report of the Examiner. 
8)  On consideration of the representation, if the Controller is of the 
opinion that pre -grant opposition has merit and the application 
shall be refused or amended, a notice is given to the applicant. 
9)  The appl icant shall, if he so desires, reply to the notice to the 
Controller by filing  his statement and evidence, if any, in support 
Section 
11A, 25(1). 
Rule 55.

===== PAGE 110 =====
110 
 
of his application within three months from the date of the notice, 
with a copy to the opponent. 
10) On consideration of the statement and evidence filed by the 
applicant, the representation including the statement and evidence 
filed by the opponent, submissions made by the parties, and after 
hearing the parties, if so requested, the Controller may either reject 
the representation or require the complete specification and other 
documents to be amended to his satisfaction before the patent is 
granted or refuse to grant a patent on the application, by passing a 
speaking order under Section 15, to simu ltaneously decide on the 
application and the representation, ordinarily within one month 
from the completion of above proceedings. 
In the matter of Neon Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. vs. Troikaa Pharma 
Limited and Ors. (Writ Petition No. 211 of 2010),  the Bombay 
High Court held that "When the law consciously confers a right on a 
person that right must be protected in the way it has been granted." 
"Section 25(1) of Patents(Amendment) Act and Rule 55 of Patent 
Rules contemplate that, if the original claim/applicatio n for grant of 
patent is amended and the amendments are opposed, then, a personal 
hearing to the objector on the amended claims is required to be given 
if specifically requested" 
09.07 Grant of Patent  
09.07.01 Compliance of conditions under the Act 
 A Patent is granted as expeditiously as possible when,  
i. the application has not been refused by the Controller by virtue 
of any power vested in him by this Actor Rules, or 
ii. the application h as not b een fo und to be in contravention of 
any of the provisions of the Act or Rules; 
The date of grant of patent is the date on which the patent is granted by 
the Controller. The date on which the patent is granted shall be entered 
in the register. The fact that the patent has been granted is p ublished in 
the official journal of the Patent Office. 
As the Patent Office has moved to electronic processing, the fact of 
grant of patent by the Controller, Patent Number is reflected on the 
Section 43,  
Rule 74

===== PAGE 111 =====
111 
 
official website on real time basis. The patent certificate is also made 
available in the website. 
09.07.02 Consequences of grant 
1) On the grant of patent, every patent is allotted a serial number by 
the electronic system. A Certificate of Patent is generated in the 
prescribed format and an entry in the e -register is made 
simultaneously. In the present electronic system, the date of recordal 
of Patent in the Register of Patents is the same as the date of grant 
of Patent by the Controller. 
2) The complete specification as granted is made available to p ublic 
through official website. 
3) The application, specification and other related documents are 
open for public inspection on payment of prescribed fee. 
4) On grant of patent, the patentee is required to pay the accumulated 
fee within 3 months from the date of  recordal of patent in the 
Register of Patents, which is now the same as the date of grant of 
patent. The said period is extendable by six months , provided the 
request is made before the expiry of extendable period. 
5) Post-grant opposition can be filed under section 25(2) by any 
person interested, within one year from the date of publication of 
grant. 
6) Every patentee and licensee has to furnish a statement regarding 
working of the patented invention on commercial scale in India at 
regular intervals (not less t han six months) in the prescribed 
format. 
Section 43, 
45, 146 (2) 
Rule 74-A, 
131(Form-
27) 
09.07.03 Date of Patent 
1) The date of Patent is the date of filing of the Application. 
However, in case of a PCT National Phase application, the date of 
patent is the date of filing of the PCT international application. 
2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no suit or 
other proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted in respect of 
an infringement committed before the date of publication of the 
application. 
      However, on and from the date of publication of the application for 
patent and until the date of grant of a patent in respect of such 
Section 45, 
7(1-B)

===== PAGE 112 =====
112 
 
application, the applicant shall have the like privileges and rights as 
if a patent for the invention had been gran ted on the date of  
publication of the application. 
09.07.04 Conditions subject to which  Patent is granted 
1) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the 
patent is granted or any article made by using a process in respe ct 
of which the patent is granted, may be imported or made by or on 
behalf of the government for the purpose merely of its own use; 
2) any process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used 
by or on behalf of the government for the purpose merely o f its 
own use; 
3) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the 
patent is granted or any article made by the use of the process in 
respect of which the patent is granted, may be made or used, and 
any process in respect of which the patent is  granted may be used, 
by any person, for the purpose merely of experiment or research 
including the imparting of instructions to pupils; and 
4) in the case of a patent in respect of any medicine or drug, the 
medicine or drug may be imported by the government for the 
purpose merely of its own use or for distribution in any 
dispensary, hospital or other medical institution maintained by or 
on behalf of the government or any other dispensary, hospital or 
medical institution which the Central Government may, havin g 
regard to the public service that such dispensary, hospital or 
medical institution renders, specify in this behalf by notification in 
the Official Gazette. 
Section 47 
09.07.05 Rights of Patentee 
1) In case of a patented product, the patentee shall have the  exclusive 
right to prevent third parties from the act of making, using, 
offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes that 
product in India. 
2) In case of a patented process, the patentee shall have the exclusive 
right to prevent third parties from the act of using that process, and 
from the act of using, offering for sale, selling or importing for 
those purposes the product obtained directly by that process in 
Section 48

===== PAGE 113 =====
113 
 
India. 
09.07.06 Rights of co-owners 
1) Where a patent is granted to two or mo re persons, each of those 
persons shall, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, be 
entitled to an equal undivided share in the patent. 
2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in Section 
51, where two or more persons are registered  as grantee or 
proprietor of a patent, then, unless an agreement to the contrary is 
in force, each of those persons shall be entitled, by himself or his 
agents, to the rights conferred by Section 48 for his own benefit 
without accounting to the other person or persons. 
3) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in section 51 
and to any agreement for the time being in force, where two or 
more persons are registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, 
then, a licence under the patent shall not be granted and a share in 
the patent shall not be assigned by one of such persons except with 
the consent of the other person or persons. 
4) Where a patented article is sold by one of two or more persons 
registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, the pu rchaser and 
any person claiming through him shall be entitled to deal with the 
article in the same manner as if the article had been sold by a sole 
patentee. 
5) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, the rules of law 
applicable to ownership and devolution of movable property 
generally, shall apply in relation to patents, and nothing contained in 
sub-section (1) or sub -section (2 ) of  section 50 shall affect the 
mutual rights or obligations of trustees or of the legal 
representatives of a deceased person or their rights or obligations as 
such. 
6) Nothing under section 50 shall affect the rights of the assignees of 
partial interest in a patent created before commencement of this 
Act. 
Section 50 
09.07.07 Term of Patent 
The term of Patent is 20 years fro m the date of filing of application in 
Section 53

===== PAGE 114 =====
114 
 
respect of all the patents, including those for which the term had not 
expired on 20th May, 2003, when the Patent (Amendment) Act, 2002 
came into force, provided that the renewal fee is paid every year 
before the due date or within the extended period (maximum six 
months).

===== PAGE 115 =====
115 
 
Chapter - 10: Post Grant Opposition 
10.01 Post-grant Opposition 
1) Any  person  interested  can  give  a  notice  of  opposition against 
the grant of Patent in Form 7at the appropriate Office,  any time 
after the grant but within  one year  from  the  date  of publication 
of grant of patent. 
2)  The opponent shall, along with the notice of opposition, send a 
written statement setting out the nature of opponent's interest, the 
facts upon which he bases his case and relief which he seeks and 
evidence, if any. 
3)  The post -grant opposition can be filed on any of the grounds as 
mentioned in Section 25(2), but on no other grounds. 
4)   After receipt of the notice of opposition, the Controller shall notify 
the patentee about the fact of receipt of such notice, without any 
delay. 
5)  A copy of the statement and evidence, if any, shall also be delivered 
to the patentee by the opponent. 
6)   If the patentee desires to contest the opposit ion, he shall file a reply 
statement setting out fully the grounds upon which the opposition is 
contested and evidence, if any, in support of his case within a period 
of two months from the date of receipt of the copy of opponent ‘s 
written statement and evidence, if any, and also deliver a copy to the 
opponent. 
7)   If the patentee does not desire to contest or does not file his reply 
and evidence within two months, the patent shall be deemed to 
have been abandoned and the Controller shall issue the order o f 
revocation of Patent and the fact of revocation shall be entered in 
the register of patents. 
8)   After receipt of reply from the patentee, the opponent may file his 
evidence in reply within one month from the date of delivery to him 
of a copy of the pat entee‗s reply statement and evidence. The 
evidence in reply by the opponent shall be strictly confined to the 
matters in the patentee‘s evidence. The opponent shall also deliver a 
Section 
2(1)(t), 
25(2). Rule 
55A, 60, 
126, 127. 
Form 7.

===== PAGE 116 =====
116 
 
copy of his reply evidence to the patentee. 
9)  No further evidence shall be  delivered by either party, except with 
the leave or direction of Controller. 
10)  Further evidence can be filed by either party if  the same is prayed 
before the hearing is fixed by the Controller under rule  62, 
whereupon  the Controller shall dispose of  the petition by either 
allowing or rejecting it.  
11)  Where a specification or other document in a language other than 
English is referred to in the notice  of opposition or any  statement 
or evidence, an attested translation thereof in English should be 
furnished along with such notice, statement or evidence, as the case 
may be. 
12)  Evidence shall be filed on affidavits as required under Rule 126. 
13)  Exhibits shall be filed as required under Rule 127. 
10.02 Constitution of Opposition Board 
1) After receipt of a n otice of opposition, an Opposition Board is 
constituted by the Controller, by order, to examine such notice 
including all documents filed under rule 57-60 in connection with the 
opposition by the opponent as well as patentee. 
2) The Opposition Board consists of three members with one of them 
as Chairman. 
3) The Examiner may be a member of the Board. However, the 
Examiner who has dealt with the application for patent during the 
prosecution proceeding s for grant of patent thereon shall not be 
included as a member of the Board. 
4.  The Board shall submit the report with reasons on each ground  taken  
in  the  notice  of  opposition,  after examining the notice along with 
all statements, documents and ev idence submitted by the parties  as a 
joint recommendation within three months from the date on which 
all such documents were forwarded to them. 
5. A copy of the recommendation of opposition board should be 
provided to the parties to the proceedings by the Controller along 
with the hearing notice. 
Section 
25(3)  
Rule 56, 
57, 58, 59, 
60

===== PAGE 117 =====
117 
 
10.03 Hearing 
1) On completion of the presentation of evidence, if any, and a fter 
receiving the recommendation of Opposition Board , the Controller 
shall fix a date and time  for   the  hearing  of    opposition  and  
inform  the parties at least ten days in advance. 
2) On receipt of the notice of hearing, if either party desires to be 
heard, he shall inform the Controller by a notice along with the 
prescribed fee. 
3) The Controller may require the members of Opposition Board to be 
present in the hearing 
4) The Controller may refuse to hear any party , which has not given 
such notice and not paid the prescribed fee. 
5) If either party intends to rely on any Publication at the hearing not 
already mentioned in the notice of opposition, statement or 
evidence, he shall give to the other party and to the Controller a 
notice of his intention to do so, together with details of such 
publication. Such notice shall be given at least five days before the 
date of hearing. 
6) After hearing the party or parties desirous of being heard, or if 
neither party desires to be heard, then without a hearing and after 
taking into consideration the recommendation  of  Opposition  
Board,  the  Controller shall  decide  the  opposition,  i.e. revoke  the 
patent or order amendments in the Patent or refuse the opposition 
by issuing  a speaking order accordingly. 
7) If amendment of specification or any other document is ordered by 
the Controller, the patentee shall submit such amende d documents 
to the office within a reasonable time, as directed by the Controller. 
Rule 62

===== PAGE 118 =====
118 
 
Chapter 11: Post-grant procedures 
11.01 i. Maintenance of Patent – Renewal: 
       To keep a patent in force, the renewal fees shall be payable at the 
expiration of the second year from the date of the patent or of any 
succeeding year and the same shall be remitted to the Patent Office 
before the expiration of the second or the succeeding year. 
ii. Further, renewal of a patent can be done beyond the due date in 
the ext ended period of six months from  the due  date by filing 
Form-4 along with the prescribed fee.  
iii. Where a patent is granted later than two years from the date  of  
filing  of  the  application,  the  fees  which  have become due in 
the meantime shall be paid within a period of three months from 
the date of recording of the patent in  the  Register of Patents.  If a 
patent is granted before the expiry of two years from the date of 
filing of application, the first renewal fee becomes due in respect of 
the third year. However, the same shall be paid before the expiry of 
second year. First Renewal fee for a patent becomes due in respect 
of the third year counted from the date of filing of application for 
patent. However, the renewal fee for third year has to be pai d 
before the expiry of second year. For clarification, the renewal fee 
may be paid before the expiration of the fourth year from the date 
of Patent for the fifth year and so on. 
iv. While paying the renewal fee, the patentee shall quote the correct 
patent number and the year in respect of which the renewal fee is 
being paid. Any mistake in the above said particulars may lead to a 
lapse of patent. 
v. A renewal fee is  not required to be paid in respect of a patent of 
addition. However , if any such patent becomes an independent 
patent the same fees shall thereafter be payable. 
vi. Annual renewal fee can be paid for more than one year in advance. 
Section 53, 
55(2), 142 
(4).  
Rule 80. 
Form-4. 
11.02 Restoration of Lapsed Patents 
1) When  a  Patent  has  ceased  to  have  effec t  due  to  non - 
payment of renewal fees within the prescribed time, the Patent may 
be restored by filing an application for restoration in Form -15 
Section 60. 
Rule 84, 
94. Form-
15.

===== PAGE 119 =====
119 
 
within eighteen months from the date on which the patent ceased 
to have effect. Such application for restoration can be made by the 
patentee/assignee, or his legal representative and in case of joint 
applicants, then, with the leave of the Controller, any one or more 
of them without joining the others. 
2) The applicant has to state, the circumstances which led to t he 
failure of payment of ren ewal fees. The application must include a    
statement    fully    setting    out    such circumstances that led to 
the failure to pay the renewal fee. This statement is to be supported 
by evidence along with copies of relevant documents. 
3) The evidence must support the patentee's claim that the failure to 
pay was unintentional and there has been no undue delay in 
applying for the restoration. 
4) The Controller may call for further evidence to justify that the 
failure to pay was unint entional and that there has been no undue 
delay for making the application. 
5) If a patentee has failed to register a change of name or new address 
of service before cessation, he shall first apply under Rule 94 for 
such alteration(s) in  the register . If he c hanged his name after 
cessation he must prove his identity. In both cases he must draw 
and sign the application in his new name but in the latter case must 
add 'formerly known as' to his identification. 
11.02.01 Procedure for disposal of application for Restoration 
1) When the Controller is prima facie  satisfied after verification of 
evidence submitted in support of  Form 15 that the failure to pay 
the renewal fee was unintentional and there had been no undue 
delay, the application for restoration will be published in the official 
journal under rule 84(3). 
2) If the Controller is satisfied that prima facie case for restoration has 
not been made, the Controller may issue a notice to the applicant to 
that effect. Within one month f rom the date of notice, if the 
applicant makes a request to be heard on the matter, a hearing shall 
be given and the restoration application may be disposed. If no 
request for hearing is received within one month from the date of 
Section 61, 
62. Rule 
84, 85, 86. 
Form-14, 
15.

===== PAGE 120 =====
120 
 
notice by the Controller, the application for restoration will be  
refused. In case of rejection of the application for restoration, a 
speaking order shall be issued. 
3) Any person interested may give notice of opposition in Form 14, in 
the  prescribed  manner,  to  the  application  for restoration within  
two months of the date of publication in the official journal on the 
grounds that the failure to pay the renewal fee was not unintentional 
or that there has been  undue delay in the making of the application. 
4) The notice of opposition shall include a statement setting out the 
nature of the opponent's interest, the grounds of opposition and the 
facts relied upon. The notice of opposition shall be sent to the 
applicant by the Controller. 
5) The procedure specified in rules 57 to 63 for post grant opposition 
relating to  filing of written statement, reply statement , reply 
evidence, hearing and cost shall apply in this case , except the 
procedural part related to Opposition Board provided under rule  62 
(1) and 62 (5). 
6) When no opposition is recei ved within a period of two months 
from the date of publication of application for restoration, or 
opposition, if any, is disposed of in favour of the applicant for 
restoration, the Controller shall issue an order allowing the 
application for restoration. T he unpaid renewal fee and the 
additional fee, as mentioned in the first schedule, shall be paid 
within one month from the date of order of the Controller. 
7) The fact that a patent has been restored shall be published in the 
official journal. 
8) To protect the p ersons who have begun to use the applicant's 
invention between the date when the patent ceased to have effect 
and the date of publication of the application for restoration, every 
order for restoration shall include the provisions and other 
conditions, as the Controller may impose for protection and 
compensation of above -mentioned persons. No suit or other 
proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted in respect of an 
infringement of a patent committed between the date on which the

===== PAGE 121 =====
121 
 
Patent ceased to have effec t and the date of the Publication of the 
Application for restoration of the patent. 
11.03 Registration of Assignments/Transfer of Right 
1) An assignment of a patent or of a share in a patent, a mortgage, 
licence or the creation of any other interest in a patent shall be valid 
only if the same were in writing and the agreement between the 
parties concerned is reduced to the form of a document embodying 
all the terms and conditions governing their rights and obligat ions 
and has been duly executed. 
2) Any person who becomes entitled by assignment, transmission or 
operation of law to a patent or to a share in patent or becomes 
entitled as a mortgagee, licensee or otherwise to any other interest in 
a patent, may apply in w riting in Form -16 to the Controller for the 
registration of his title or notice of his interest in the register , as the 
case may be . Such an application can also be made by the assignor, 
mortgagor, licensor or other party as the case may be.  Provided that 
in the case of a licen se granted under a patent, the Controller shall, 
if so requested by the patentee or licensee, take steps for secur ing 
that the terms of the licen se are not disclosed to any person except 
under the order of a court. 
3) Where such application is made for the registration of title or notice 
of interest of any person, the Controller, upon proof of title or 
interest to his satisfaction, shall enter in the register such particulars 
as are appropriate. 
4) If there is any dispute between the parties, the Controller may refuse 
to take any action to make an entry in the register  until the rights of 
the parties have been determined by a competent court. 
5) Except for the purpose of making an application for registration  of  
right,  title  or  interest  in   the  register  of patents , or for an 
application for rectification of the register of patents in the 
Appellate Board, a document in respect of which no entry has been 
made in the register , shall not be admitted by the Controller or by 
any court as eviden ce of the title of any person to a patent or to a 
share or interest therein unless  the  Controller  or  the  court,  for  
Section 68, 
69.  
Rule 90, 
91, 92. 
Form-16.

===== PAGE 122 =====
122 
 
reasons  to  be recorded in writing, otherwise directs. 
6) If requested by the patentee / licensee, the terms of the license shall 
be kept confidential and not disclosed to any per son, except under 
the order of  Court. 
7) Every assignment and every other document giving effect to or 
being evidence of the transfer of a patent or affecting the 
proprietorship thereof or creating an interest ther ein as claimed in 
such application, shall, unless the Controller otherwise directs, be 
presented to him together with the application which shall be 
accompanied by a copy (scanned) of the assignment or other 
document certified to be true copies by the appl icant or his agent 
and the Controller may call for such other proof of title or written 
consent as he may require. 
11.04 Surrender Of Patents 
1) The patentee may at any time offer to surrender his patent through 
an application on plain paper. On receipt of such an offer ,  the  
Controller  shall publish  the  offer  in  the  Official Journal and also 
notifies every person (other than the patentee) whose name appears 
in the register as having an interest in the patent. 
2) An opposition against the offer to surrender the patent may be filed 
by any person interested in Form 14 within 3 months from the date 
of publication of such offer in the Official Journal. The Controller 
shall inform the Patentee on receipt of such notice. 
3) The procedure relating to filing of written statement, reply 
statement, leaving evidence , hearing and cost of the opposition is 
similar to that of post-grant opposition as per Rules 57 -63,except 
the procedural part related to Opposition Board included un der rule  
62 (1) and 62 (5). 
4) In case, the Controller accepts the patentee's offer to surrender the 
patent, he may revoke it and publish such revocation in the official 
journal. 
Section 63. 
Rules 57-
63 and 87. 
Form-14. 
11.05 Working of Patents 
1) Patents are granted to encourage inventions and to secure that the 
inventions are worked in India on a commercial scale and to the 
Section 83, 
146. Rule 
131(2)

===== PAGE 123 =====
123 
 
fullest extent that is reasonably practicable without undue delay. 
2) The Controller has the power to call for the information such as 
periodical statements as to the extent to which the patented 
invention has been commercially worked in India, as may be 
specified in the notice issued to that effect at any time during the 
continuance of the Patent. 
3) A patentee or a licensee shall furnish such i nformation within two 
months from the date of such notice or within such further time as 
the Controller may allow. 
4) The patentee and every licensee shall furnish a statement as to the 
extent to which the patented invention has been worked on a 
commercial scale in India, in Form 27, in respect of every calendar 
year, within three months of the end of each year. 
Form-27 
11.06 Amendments after the grant of patents 
1) After the grant of patent, the patentee may apply for an amendment 
of the application for patent, complete specification or any 
document relating   thereto   subject   to   such   conditions,   if   
any, and as the Controller thinks fit. Such a request may be filed in 
Form-13 with the prescribed fee. 
2) An amendment of a comp lete specification may be, or include, an 
amendment of the priority date of a claim, as per Section 57 (5). 
3) The   request   shall   state   the   nature   of   the   proposed 
amendment, highlighted in an annexed copy along with the reasons. 
The amendments are allowable only by way of disclaimer, correction 
or explanation. Such amendments shall be for the purpose of 
incorporation of actual fact only. Further, no amendment of a 
complete specification shall be allowed the effect of which would be 
that the spec ification as amended would claim or describe matter 
not in substance disclosed or   shown   in   the   specification   
before   the amendment, or the amended claim(s) do not fall wholly 
within the scope of claim(s) of the specification before the 
amendment. 
4) If the nature of proposed amendment is substantive, the application 
for amendment shall be published.  For instance, any application for 
amending the complete specification or the claims or the application 
Section 57, 
59.  
Rules 57-
63and 81-
83. Form-
13, 14.

===== PAGE 124 =====
124 
 
for patent shall be published. 
5) The amended pages have to be filed by the applicant. 
6) Any person interested may give a notice of opposition in Form -14 
within three months from the date of publication of the application 
for amendment. Where such a notice of opposition is filed, the 
Controller shall notify the applicant for amendment. 
7)   After giving an opportunity to the applicant and opponent, if any, 
the Controller shall dispose of the case. The procedure specified in 
rules 57 to 63 for post grant opposition for filing of written 
statement, reply statem ent, reply evidence, hearing and costs shall 
apply in this case, except the procedural part related to Opposition 
Board included under rule  62 (1) and 62 (5). 
8)    Amendments allowed after the grant of patent shall be published. 
9)   A leave to amend the  complete specification obtained by fraud is a 
ground for revocation of patent under Section 64(1)(o). 
10) If any suit for infringement is pending before a Court or any 
proceeding for revocation of the Patent is pending before the High 
Court, the Controlle r shall not pass any order allowing or refusing 
the application for amendment. 
11.07 Amendment of patent granted to deceased applicant/ceased body 
corporate. 
1) Where, at any time after a patent has been gr anted in pursuance of 
an application under this Act, the Controller is satisfied that the 
person to whom the patent was granted had died before the patent 
was granted, the Controller may amend the patent by substituting 
for the name of that person the name  of the person to whom the 
patent ought to have been granted, and the patent shall have effect, 
and shall be deemed always to have had effect, accordingly. 
2) Similar procedure is to be followed in case of a body corporate 
ceases to exist. 
       An application for above said amendment of a patent is to be made 
in Form 10 alo ng with substantiating evidence. Upon such 
application, the Controller may amend the patent with the name of 
such claimant  by substituting the name of the deceased 
applicant/the ceased body corporate. 
Section 44 
Rule 75. 
Form-10,.

===== PAGE 125 =====
125 
 
11.08 Register of Patents 
1) Patent Office maintains the Register of Patents in electronic form, 
which is under the control and management of the Controller of 
Patents and the same is  also available on the office we bsite as e -
Register of Patents. 
2)  E-register of patents contains details about the grantee/patentee, 
notifications in respect of assignments, transmissions  of patents, 
licenses under patents, and amendments, extension and revocations 
of patents.  
3) A copy of, or extracts from, the register of patents, certified to be a 
true copy under the hand of the Controller or any officer duly 
authorized by the Controller is admissible in evidence in all legal 
proceedings. 
4) Upon the grant of a patent, the Controller shall e nter in the register 
of patents, the name, address and nationality of the grantee as the 
patentee thereof, the title of the invention (including the categories 
to which the invention relates), the date of the patent and the date 
of grant thereof together w ith the address for service of the 
patentee. The fact of payment of renewal fee shall also be entered 
in the E -register. The Register of patents also contains particulars 
regarding proceedings under the Act, before the Controller or in 
the Courts in respect of every patent. 
5) An application for alteration of name, nationality, address or 
address for service as entered in the register of patents may be 
made to the Controller in respect of any Patent. The Controller 
may require such proof of the alteration as h e may think fit before 
acting on the request. If the Controller allows such a request, 
entries in the e-Register are altered accordingly. 
6) If a patentee makes a request in writing along with the prescribed 
fees for entering an additional address for service  in India and the 
Controller is satisfied that the request shall be allowed, the 
additional address shall be entered in the e-Register. 
7) Entries in the register for each patent are available to the public on 
the official website through e-Register of Patents. 
Section 67.  
Rule 88, 
93, 94.

===== PAGE 126 =====
126 
 
11.09 Rectification of Register of Patents 
1) An application for rectification of register of patents may be made 
to the Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB) by any person 
aggrieved: 
a) by the absence or omission from the register of any entry; or 
b) by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause; or 
c) by any entry wrongly remaining on the register; or  
d) by any error or defect in any entry in the register. 
2) Notice of such application made before the IPAB is given to the 
Controller, who is entitled to be heard on the application.  Besides, 
if so ordered, the Controller shall appear before the IPAB. 
3) If IPAB passes any order rectifying the register, a notice of 
rectification is served upon the Controller, who, upon such receipt, 
shall rectify the register. 
Section 71

===== PAGE 127 =====
127 
 
Chapter-12: Appeals 
12.01 Appellate Board and Appeals  
12.01.01 Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB) 
Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB),  established under 
Section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, is the Appellate Board for the 
purposes of the Patents Act, 1970. An appeal lies to the Appellate 
Board from any decision, order or directions of the Controller or of the 
Central Government passed under the provisions mentioned in Se ction 
117A (2) only, and not against any other decision or direction.  
Section 
116,  
117A(2) 
12.01.02 Appeals 
a)  No appeal to IPAB  shall lie from any order or direction of the 
Central Government, or of the Controller, except in case of 
orders/decisions, issued by  the Controller or Central Government 
under Sections 15, 16,17, 18, 19, 20, 25(4), 28, 51, 54, 57, 60, 61, 
63, 66, 69(3), 78,84(1) to (5), 85, 88, 91, 92 and 94 of the Act. 
b)  No appeal lies  from  an  Order  of  the  Controller  granting 
extension of time when such extension is provided in any provision 
of the Act or of the rules made thereunder. 
 
Section 
117A(2), 
81. 
12.02 Appeal procedure  
a.  Every appeal from the decision of the Controller under relevant 
sections as mentioned in Section 117A (2) shall be accompanied by 
the certified copy of the decision, order or direction appealed 
against. Such application shall be filed in the form and fee 
prescribed under the IPAB Rules , 2011. 
b.   Every appeal should be made within three months from the date of 
the decision, order or direction of the Controller or of the Central 
Government, as the case may be, or within such further time as the 
IPAB may allow in accordance with the Rules. 
c.   The Controller shall have the right to appear and be heard-  
i. in any legal proceedings before the  IPAB in which the relief 
sought includes alteration or rectification of the register or in 
which any question relating to the practice of the patent office is 
raised; 
Section 
 
117E, 
117F.

===== PAGE 128 =====
128 
 
ii. in any appeal to the  IPAB from an order of the Controller on 
an application for patent— 
A. which is not opposed and the application is either refused 
by the Controller or accepted for grant by him subject to 
any amendments, modifications, conditions or 
limitations, or 
B. which   has   been   opposed   and   the    Controller 
considers that his appearance is necessary in the public 
interest. 
d.   The Controller shall appear in any case, if so directed by the IPAB.  
e.  The Controller may, in lieu of appearing, unless the IPAB otherwise 
directs, submit a statement in writing signed by him, giving such 
particulars as he thinks proper , of the proceedings before him 
relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision 
given by him or of the practice of the patent office in like cases, or 
of other matters relevant to the issues and, within his knowledge as 
the Controller, may deem it necessary, and  such  statement  shall  
be evidence in the proceedings.

===== PAGE 129 =====
129 
 
Chapter-13: Revocation of Patent 
13.01 Revocation of Patent  
13.01.01 Revocation before the High Court or Appellate Board 
a.  Any person interested or the Central Government may make a petition 
on any of the grounds, specified for revocation of Patent under 
Section 64 of the Patents Act, before the IPAB. A Patent may also be 
revoked by the High Court on a counter -claim in a suit for 
infringement of patent. 
b.  Grounds for revocation of the patent before the IPAB as well as the 
High Court are elaborated in Section 64. 
c.  Without prejudice to the provisions contained in (a) above, a patent 
may be revoked by the High Court on the petition of the Central 
Government, if the High Court is satisfied that the patentee has 
without reasonable cause failed to comply with the request of the 
Central Government to make, use or exercise t he patented invention 
for the purposes of government within the meaning of Section 99 
upon reasonable terms. 
Section 64, 
99 
13.01.02 Revocation by the Controller on direction of the Central 
Government 
a.   Where at any time after grant of a patent, the Ce ntral Government  is  
satisfied  that  a  patent  is  for  an invention  relating  to  atomic  
energy  for  which  no patent can be granted under sub -section (1) of 
section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962), it may direct 
the Controller to rev oke the patent, and thereupon the Controller, 
after giving notice, to the patentee and every other person whose 
name has been entered in the register  of patents as having an interest 
in the patent, and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, 
may revoke the patent. 
b.  In such proceedings, the Controller may allow the patentee to amend 
the complete specification in such manner as he considers necessary 
instead of revoking the patent. 
Section 65 
13.01.03 Revocation by the Central Government in public interest  
Where the Central Government is of opinion that a patent or the mode in 
which it is exercised is mischievous to the State or generally prejudicial to 
Section 66

===== PAGE 130 =====
130 
 
the public, it may, after giving the patentee an opportunity to be heard, 
make a declaration t o that effect in the Official Gazette and thereupon 
the patent shall be deemed to be revoked. 
13.01.04 Revocation by Controller for non-working 
a.  Where, in respect of a patent, a compulsory licens e has been granted, 
the Central Government or any person interested may, after the 
expiration of two  years from the date of the order granti ng the first 
compulsory license, apply to the Controller for an order revoking the 
patent on the ground: 
i. that   the   patented   invention   has   not   been wor ked in the 
territory of India, or 
ii. that reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the 
patented invention have not been satisfied, or 
iii. that the patented invention is not available to the public at a 
reasonably affordable price. 
b.  Such an applica tion shall contain such particulars , as may be 
prescribed, the facts upon which the application is based and , in the 
case of an application other than the one made by the Central 
Government, it shall also set out the nature of the applicant's 
interest. 
c.   Such applications shall ordinarily be decided within one   year   from   
the   date   of   presentation   to   the Controller. 
Section 85

===== PAGE 131 =====
131 
 
Chapter 14: Compulsory Licensing 
14.01 Working of patents - General principles 
a.  Patents are granted to en courage inventions and to secure that the 
inventions are worked in India on a commercial scale and to the 
fullest extent that is reasonably practicable without undue delay. 
b.  Patents are not granted merely to enable patentees to enjoy a 
monopoly for the importation of the patented article. 
c.  The protection and enforcement of Patent rights contribute to the 
promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and 
dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers 
and users of technolog ical knowledge and in a manner conducive to 
social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and 
obligations. 
d.  Patents granted do not impede protection of public health and 
nutrition and should act as instrument to promote public interest 
especially in sectors of vital importance for socio -economic and 
technological development of India. 
e.   Patents granted do not in any way prohibit Central Government in 
taking measures to protect public health. 
f.  The Patent right shall not be abused by the patentee or person deriving 
title or interest in patent from the patentee, and the patentee or a 
person deriving title or interest in patent from the patentee does not 
resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely 
affect the international transfer of technology. 
g.  Patents are granted to make the benefit of the patented invention 
available at reasonably affordable prices to the public. 
Section 83 
14.02 Compulsory License 
An application for grant of a compulsory license may be made under the 
following provisions: 
a.   Section 84.  
b.   Section 92. 
c.   Section 92A. 
 
14.02.01 Compulsory License under Section 84 
a.  Any person interested may make an application to the Controller for 
grant of Compulsory License for a patent after the expiry of three 
Section 84 
Form-17

===== PAGE 132 =====
132 
 
years from the date of grant of the patent on the following grounds: 
i. that the reasonable requirements of public with respect to the 
patented invention have not been satisfied, or 
ii. that the patented invention is not available to the public at 
reasonably affordable price, or 
iii. that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of 
India. 
      Such an application may also be made by the licensee. 
b.   No person shall be stopped from alleging the grounds i -iii above by 
reason of any admission mad e by him in the licence or otherwise or 
by reason of his having accepted such a licence. 
c.  In considering such an application, the Controller shall take into 
account- 
i. the nature of the invention, the time which has elapsed since 
the sealing of the patent  and the measures already taken by the 
patentee or any licensee to make full use of the invention; 
ii. the ability of the applicant to work the invention to the public 
advantage; 
iii. the  capacity  of  the  applicant  to  undertake  the  risk  in 
providing   capit al   and   working   the   invention,   if   the 
application were granted; 
iv. as to whether the applicant has  made efforts to obtain a licens e 
from the patentee on reasonable terms and conditions and such 
efforts have not been successful within a reasonable p eriod as 
the Controller may deem fit. Reasonable period shall be 
construed as a period not ordinarily exceeding  a  period  of  six  
months.  However, these circumstances shall not be applicable 
in case of national emergency or other circumstances of 
extreme urgency or in case of public non -commercial use or on 
establishment of a ground of anti-competitive practices adopted 
by the patentee , but shall not be required to take into account 
matters subsequent to the making of the application. 
14.02.01.01 Reasonable requirements of the public 
The reasonable requirements of the public shall be deemed not to have 
been satisfied— 
Section 
84(7)

===== PAGE 133 =====
133 
 
I. if, by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant a licence or 
licences on reasonable terms,— 
i. an  existing  trade  or  industry  or  the  development thereof or 
the establishment of any new trade or industry in India or the 
trade or industry in India or the trade or industry of any person 
or class of persons trading or manufacturing in India is 
prejudiced; or 
ii. the dema nd for the patented article has not been met to an 
adequate extent or on reasonable terms; or 
iii. a market  for  export  of  the  patented  article manufactured in 
India is not being supplied or developed; or 
iv. the  establishment   or   development   of   commer cial activities 
in India is prejudiced; or 
II.   if, by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of 
licences under the patent or upon the purchase, hire or use of the 
patented article or process, the manufacture, use or  sale  of  
materials  not  protected  by  the  patent,  or  the establishment or 
development of any trade or industry in India, is prejudiced; or 
III.  if the patentee imposes a condition upon the grant of licences under 
the patent to provide exclusive grant back, preventi on to challenges 
to the validity of patent or coercive package licensing; or 
IV.  if the patented invention is not being worked in the territory of India 
on a commercial scale to an adequate extent or is not being so 
worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable; or 
V.    if the working of the patented invention in the territory of India on a 
commercial scale is being prevented or hindered by the importation 
from abroad of the patented article by- 
    i.    the patentee or persons claiming under him; or 
    ii.    persons directly or indirectly purchasing from him;   or 
    iii.   other persons against whom the patentee is not taking or   
           has not  taken proceedings for infringement. 
14.02.01.02 Contents of application 
Such an application shall contain a statement setting out the nature of the 
applicant's interest, facts upon which the application is based and terms 
and conditions of the licence the applicant is willing to accept. 
Section 84 
Form-17

===== PAGE 134 =====
134 
 
14.02.01.03 Adjournment of  application for compulsory licence in certain 
cases: 
(1)  Where an application under section 84 or section 85, as the case may 
be, is made on the grounds that the patented invention has not been 
worked in the territory of India or on the ground mentioned in clause 
(d) of sub-section (7) of section 84 and the Controller is satisfied that 
the time which has elapsed since the sealing of the patent has for any 
reason been insufficient to enable the invention to be worked on a 
commercial scale to an adeq uate extent or to enable the invention to 
be so worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable, he 
may, by order, adjourn the further hearing of the application for such 
period not exceeding twelve months in the aggregate as appears to 
him to be sufficient for the invention to be so worked: 
       Provided that in any case where the patentee establishes that the 
reason why a patented invention could not be worked as aforesaid 
before the date of the application was due to any State or Central Ac t 
or any rule or regulation made thereunder or any order of the 
Government imposed otherwise than by way of a condition for the 
working of the invention in the territory of India or for the disposal 
of the patented articles or of the articles made, by the process or by 
the use of the patented plant, machinery, or apparatus, then, the 
period of adjournment ordered under this sub -section shall be 
reckoned from the date on which the period during which the 
working of the invention was prevented by such Act, ru le or 
regulation or order of Government as computed from the date of the 
application, expires. 
(2)  No adjournment under sub -section (1) shall be ordered unless the 
Controller is satisfied that the patentee has taken with promptitude 
adequate or reasonable steps to start the working of the invention in 
the territory of India on a commercial scale and to an adequate 
extent. 
Section 86 
14.02.01.04 Procedure for dealing with application for Compulsory Licence: 
a.  Where the Controller is satisfied  upon  cons ideration  of  an 
application for compulsory licence that prima facie case has been made 
out, he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of the application 
upon the patentee and any other person appearing from the register  
Section  87, 
88 
- 
Rules  62,

===== PAGE 135 =====
135 
 
of patents  to be interested in  the patent in respect of which the 
application is made, and shall publish the application in the official 
journal. 
b.   The patentee or any other person desiring to oppose the application 
may,  within  two  months  from  the  date  of  publication  of  th e 
application or within such further time as the Controller may on 
application  (made  either  before  or  after  the  expiration  of  the 
prescribed time) allow, give to the Controller notice of opposition. 
c.   The notice of  opposition  shall  include  grounds  on  which  the 
application is opposed and the terms and conditions of the licence, if 
any, the opponent is prepared to grant to the applicant and shall be 
accompanied by evidence in support of the opposition. 
d.  The opponent shall serve a copy of  his notice of opposition and 
evidence on the applicant and notify the Controller when such 
service has been effected. 
e.  No further statement or evidence shall be delivered by either party 
except with the leave of or on requisition by the Controller. 
f.   The Controller shall forthwith fix a date and time for the hearing of 
the case and shall give the parties not less than ten days notice of 
such hearing. 
g.   The procedure specified in sub -rules (2) to (5) of rule 62, shall, so far 
as may be, apply to th e procedure for hearing under this rule as they 
apply to the hearing in opposition proceedings. 
h.   If, upon consideration of the evidence, the Controller is satisfied that 
a prima facie case has not been made out, he shall notify the 
applicant accordingly, and unless the applicant requests to be heard 
in the matter, the Controller shall refuse the application. The 
applicant shall make such a request within one month from the date 
of such notification. 
i.   If the applicant requests for a hearing within th e time allowed, the 
Controller shall, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being 
heard, determine whether the application may be proceeded with or 
whether it shall be refused and issue a speaking order on the matter 
as expeditiously as possible. 
96-101, 
Form-14

===== PAGE 136 =====
136 
 
14.02.01.04 Terms and Conditions 
In  settling  the  terms  and  conditions  of  a  licence,  the  Controller 
endeavors to secure - 
a.  that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved to the 
patentee  or   other  person  beneficially  entitled  to  the  patent,  is 
reasonable, having regard to the nature of the invention, the 
expenditure incurred by the patentee in making the invention or in 
developing it and obtaining a patent and keeping it in force and other 
relevant factors; 
b.  that the patented invention is worked to the fullest extent by the 
person to whom the licence is granted and with reasonable profit to 
him; 
c.  that the patented articles are made available to the public at  reasonably 
affordable prices; 
d.    that the licence granted is a non-exclusive licence; 
e.    that the right of the licensee is non-assignable; 
f.    that the licence is for the balance term of the patent unless a shorter 
term is consistent with public interest; 
g.   that the licence is granted with a predominant purpose of supply in 
the  Indian  market  and  that  the  licensee  may  also  export  the 
patented product, if need be in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 84; 
h.   that in the case of semi -conductor technology, the licence granted is 
to work the invention for public non-commercial use; 
i.   that in case the licence is granted to remedy a practice determined after 
judicial or administrative process to be an ti-competitive, the licensee 
shall be permitted to export the patented product, if need be. 
The terms and conditions of a licence settled by the Controller, may be 
revised upon Application by the licensee after he has worked the 
invention on a commercial s cale for at least twelve months, on the 
ground that the terms and conditions settled have proved to be more 
onerous than originally expected and that in consequence thereof the 
licensee is unable to work the invention except at a loss. However, no 
such application shall be entertained a second time. 
Section 90

===== PAGE 137 =====
137 
 
14.02.01.05 Application by licensee 
a.   Where the Controller is satisfied on an application for compulsory 
license that the manufacture, use or sale of materials not protected by 
the patent is preju diced by reason of conditions imposed by the 
patentee upon the grant of licen ses under the patent, or upon the 
purchase, hire or use of the patented article or process, he may, 
subject to the provisions of Secti on 84, order the grant of licens es 
under the patent to such customers of the applicant as he thinks fit as 
well as to the applicant. 
b.  Where an application for compulsory license is made by a person being 
the holder of a licens e under the patent, the Controller may, if he 
makes an order for the gra nt of a licens e to the applicant, order th e 
existing license to be cancelled, or may, if the thinks fit, instead  of  
making  an  order   for  the  grant  of  a  licens e  to  the appl icant, 
order the existing license to be amended. 
Section 88 
14.02.01.06 Compulsory license in case of two or more patents held by the 
same patentee 
Where two or more patents are held by the same patentee and an 
applicant for a compulsory licen se establishes that the reasonable 
requirements of the public have not been satisfied with respect to some 
only of the said patents, then, if the Controller is satisfied that the 
applicant cannot efficiently o r satisfactorily work the licens e granted to 
him under those patents without infringing the other patents held by the 
patentee and if  those patents involve important technical advancement 
or considerable economic significance in relation to the other patents, he 
may, by order, direct the grant of a licen se in respect of the other patents 
also to enable the licensee to work the patent or  patents in regard to 
which a license is granted under section 84. 
Section 88 
14.02.02 License for related patents 
a. At any time after the grant of a patent, any person who has the right 
to work any other patented invention, either as patentee or as 
licensee   thereof,   exclusive   or   otherwise,   may   apply   to   the 
Controller for the grant of a licen se of the first mentioned patent on 
the ground that he is prevented  or hindered without such licens e 
from  working  the  other  invention  efficiently  o r  to  the  best 
Section 91 
Form-17

===== PAGE 138 =====
138 
 
advantage possible. 
b. No  order  under  such  an  application  shall  be  made  unless  the 
Controller is satisfied – 
i. that the applicant is able and willing to grant, or procure the grant 
to the patentee and his licensees if they so desire, of a licen se in 
respect of the other invention on reasonable terms; and 
ii. that the other invention has made a substantial contribution to the 
establishment or development of commercial or industrial 
activities in the territory of India. 
c. Controller,  if  s atisfied,  that  the  grounds  alleged  have  been 
established by the applicant, he may make an order on such terms as  
he thinks fit granting a licens e under the first mentioned patent and 
a similar order under the other patent if so requested by the 
proprietor of the first mentioned patent or his licensee. 
     However, such a licens e granted by the Controller shall be non - 
assignable except with the assignment of the respective patents. 
d. The provisions of sections 87-90 shall apply to licenses granted under 
this section as they apply to licenses granted under section 84. 
14.02.03 Compulsory licence on Notification by Central Government 
1.  If the Central Government is satisfied, in respect of any patent in force 
in circumstances of na tional emergency or in circumstances of 
extreme urgency or in case of public non -commercial use, that it is 
necessary that compulsory licenses should be granted at any time 
after the grant thereof to work the invention, it may make a 
declaration to that ef fect, by notification in the Official Gazette, and 
thereupon the following provisions shall have effect, that is to say - 
i.   the Controller shall, on application made at any time after the 
notification by any person interested,  grant to the applicant a 
license under the patent on such terms and conditions as he 
thinks fit; 
ii.   in settling the terms and conditions of a licens e granted under 
this section, the Controller shall endeavour to secure that the 
articles manufactured under the patent shall be ava ilable to the 
public  at  the  lowest  prices  consistent  with  the  patentees 
Section 92 
Form-17

===== PAGE 139 =====
139 
 
deriving a reasonable advantage from their patent rights. 
iii.   The procedure as mentioned in Sections 83, 87, 88, 89 and 90 
shall apply in rela tion to the grant of such licen ses as they apply 
in relation to the grant of licenses under Sec. 84. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything contained in a -iii above, if the Controller is 
satisfied on consideration of the application that, it is necessary in- 
a. a circumstance of national emergency; or 
b. a circumstance of extreme urgency; or 
c. a case of public non-commercial use, 
which may arise or is required, as the case may be, including public 
health crisis relating to Acquired Immuno -Deficiency Syndrome, 
Human Immune Deficiency Virus, Tuberculosis, M alaria or other 
epidemics, the procedure as mentioned in Section 87 shall not apply; 
provided the Controller shall, as soon as may be practicable, inform 
the patentee of the patent relating to the application for such non -
application of Section 87. 
14.02.04 Compulsory   licens e   for   export   of   patented   pharmaceutical 
products in certain exceptional circumstances 
a)  Compulsory license shall be available for manufacture and export of 
patented pharmaceutical product to any country having insufficient or 
no manufacturing capacity in the pharmaceutical sector for the 
concerned product to address public health problems, provided 
compulsory license has been granted by such country or such country 
has, by notification or otherwise, allow ed importation of the patented 
pharmaceutical products from India. 
b)  The Controller shall, on receipt of an application in the prescribed 
manner, grant a compulsory license solely for manufacture and export 
of the concerned pharmaceutical product to such  country under such 
terms and conditions as may be specified and published by him. 
c)   The provisions of (a) and (b) shall be without prejudice to the extent   
to   which   pharmaceutical   products   produc ed   under   a 
compulsory licens e can be exporte d under any other provision of 
this Act. 
Section 92A 
Form-17

===== PAGE 140 =====
140 
 
d)   'Pharmaceutical products' means any patented product, or product 
manufactured through a patented process, of the pharmaceutical 
sector needed to address public health problems and shall be 
inclusive of ingredie nts necessary for their manufacture and 
diagnostic kits required for their use. 
14.02.05 Termination of Compulsory License 
a) Patentee or any other person deriving title or interest in the patent, 
may make an application in Form 21 along with the evidence in 
support of the application  for termination of compulsory licence 
granted under Section 84 on the ground that the circumstances that 
gave   rise   to   the   grant   thereof   no   longer   exist   and   such 
circumstances are unlikely to recur. 
b) The holder of the compulsory licence shall have the right to object to 
such termination. 
c) The procedure as elaborated under rule 102 for dealing with such 
application for termination of compulsory licence, including 
conducting hearing involving the both the parties, shall apply. 
d) While considering such an application, the Controller shall take into 
account that the interest of the person, who had previously been 
granted the licence, is not unduly prejudiced. 
e)  If the Controller decides to terminate t he compulsory licence he 
shall forthwith issue an order giving terms and conditions, if any, of 
such termination and serve copies of the order to both the parties. 
Section 94

===== PAGE 141 =====
141 
 
Chapter 15: Use of inventions for purposes of Government and Acquisition of 
inventions by Central Government 
15.01 Use of inventions for the purposes of Government 
An invention is said to be used for the purpose of Government if it is 
made, used, exercised or vended for the purposes of Central 
Government, a State Government or a Government undertaking. 
 
Section 99, 
100 
15.02 Power of Central Government to use inventions for purpose of 
Government 
a.  Where an invention has, before the priority date of the relevant claim 
of the complete specification, been duly recorded in a docum ent or 
tested or tried, by or on behalf of the government or a government 
undertaking, otherwise than in consequence of the communication of 
the invention directly or indirectly by the patentee or by a person 
from whom he derives title, any use of the inve ntion by the Central 
Government or any person authorized in writing by it for the 
purposes of government may be made free of any royalty or other 
remuneration to the patentee. 
b.   If and so far as the invention has not been so recorded or tried or 
tested as aforesaid, any use of the invention made by the Central 
Government of any person authorized by it as above said at any time 
after grant of the patent or in consequence of any  such  
communication  as  aforesaid,  shall  be  made  upon the terms as may 
be agreed upon either before or aft er the use, between the Central 
Government or any person authorised by Central Government and 
the patentee or as may in default of agreement be determined by the 
High Court on a reference under Section 103. 
      In case o f any such use of any patent, the patentee shall be paid not 
more than adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case, 
taking into account the economic value of the use of the patent. 
c. The authorisation by the Central Government in respect of an  
invention may be given either before or after the patent is granted and 
either before or after the acts in respect of which such authorisation is 
given or done, and may be given to any person, whether or not he is 
authorised directly or indirectly by the applicant or the patentee to

===== PAGE 142 =====
142 
 
make, use, exercise or vend the invention or import the machine, 
apparatus or other article or medicine or drug covered by such patent. 
d.   Where an invention has been used by or with the authority of the 
Central Government for the purposes of government then except in 
case of national emergency or other circumstances of extreme 
urgency or for non -commercial use, the government shall notify the 
patentee as soon as practicable of the fact and furnish him with such 
information as to the extent of the use of the invention as he may, 
from time to time, reasonably require. Where the invention has been 
used for the purposes of a government undertaking, the Central 
Government may call for such information as may be necessary for 
this purpose from such undertaking. 
e.   The right to make, use, exercise and vend an invention for the 
purposes of government shall include the right to sell on non - 
commercial basis the goods which have been made in exercise of that 
right and a purchaser of go ods so sold, and a person claiming 
through him, shall have the power to deal with the goods as if the 
Central Government or the person authorised by the Central 
Government were the patentee of the invention. 
f.   Where in respect of a patent, which has bee n the subject of an 
authorisation,  there  is  an  exclusive  licensee  or  where  such patent 
has been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or 
other benefits determined by reference to the use of the  invention   
(including  payments   b y  way  of  minimum royalty),  the  notice  
shall  also  be  given  to  such  exclusive licensee or assignor, as the 
case may be, and the reference to the patentee shall be deemed to 
include a reference to such assignor or exclusive licensee. 
g.   However, the provisions for use of invention by the Government  
specified in this chapter shall not apply in respect of any such 
importation, making or using of any machine, apparatus or other 
article or of any such using of any process or of any such importation,  
using or distribution of any medicine or drug, as may be made by 
virtue of one or more of the conditions specified in section 47.

===== PAGE 143 =====
143 
 
15.03 Rights of third parties 
a.  In relation to any use of a patented invention , or an invention in 
respect of which an ap plication for a patent is pending, made for the 
purposes of government- 
i. by the Central Government or any person authorised by the 
Central Government under section 100; or 
ii. by the patentee or applicant for the patent to the order made 
by the Central Government, 
the provisions of any licence, assignment or agreement granted or 
made between the patentee or applicant for the patent (or any  
person  who  derives  title  from  him  or  from  whom  he derives 
title) and any person other than the Central Gove rnment, shall be of 
no effect so far as those provisions - 
i. restrict   or   regulate   the   use   for   the   purposes   of 
government   of   the   invention,   or   of   any   model, 
document or information relating thereto, or 
ii. provide for the maki ng of payments in respect of any use of 
the invention or of the model, document or information 
relating thereto for the purposes of government, 
and the reproduction or publication of any model or document in 
connection with the said use for the purposes of  government shall 
not been deemed to be an infringement of any copyright subsisting 
in the model or document. 
b.   Where the patent, or the right to apply for or obtain the patent, has 
been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other 
benefits determined by reference to the use of the invention then, in 
relation to any use of the invention made for the purposes of 
government by the patentee to the order of the Central Government, 
sub-section (3) of section 100 shall have effect as if that  use were 
made by virtue of an authority given under  that  section,  and  any  
use  of  the  invention  for  the purposes of government by virtue of 
sub-section (3) of that section shall have effect as if the reference to 
the patentee included a reference  to the assignor of the patent, and 
any sum payable by virtue of that sub -section shall be divided 
between the patentee and the assignor in such proportion as may be 
Section 101

===== PAGE 144 =====
144 
 
agreed upon between them or as may in default of agreement be 
determined by the High Court on a reference under Section103. 
c.  Where by virtue of sub -section (3) of section 100, payments are 
required to be made by the Central Government or persons 
authorised under sub-section (1) of that section in respect of the use 
of an invention for the pu rposes of government, and where in  
respect  of  such  patent  there  is  an  exclusive  licensee authorised  
under  his  licence  to  use  the  invention  for  the purposes of 
government, such sum shall be shared by the patentee and such 
licensee in such proportions, if any, as may be  agreed  upon  
between  them  or  as  may  in  default  of agreement be determined 
by the High Court on a reference under section 103 to be just, having 
regard to any expenditure incurred by the licensee— 
i. in developing the said invention; or  
ii. in making payments to the patentees other than royalties or 
other benefits determined by reference to the use of the 
invention in consideration of the license. 
15.04 Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central government 
a.  The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary that an 
invention which is the subject of an application for a patent or a 
patent should be acquired from the applicant or the patentee for a 
public purpose, publish a notificati on to that effect in the Official 
Gazette, and thereupon the invention or patent and all rights in 
respect of the invention or patent shall, by force of this section, stand 
transferred to and be vested in the Central Government. 
b.   Notice of the acquisition shall be given to the applicant, and, where a 
patent has been granted, to the patentee and other persons, if any, 
appearing in the register as having an interest in the patent. 
c.  The Central Government shall pay to the applicant, or as the case may 
be, the patentee and other persons appearing on the register as 
having an interest in the patent such other compensation as may be 
agreed upon between the Central Government  and  the  applicant  
or  the  patentee  and  other persons; or, as may, in default  of 
agreement, be determined by the High Court on a reference under 
Section 102

===== PAGE 145 =====
145 
 
section 103 to be just having regard to the expenditure incurred in 
connection with the invention and, in the case of a patent, the term 
thereof, the period during which and the manner in which it has 
already been worked (including the profits made during such period 
by the patentee or by his licensee whether exclusive or otherwise) and 
other relevant factors. 
15.05 Reference of disputes to High Court regarding use/acquisition 
a.  Any dispute as to the exercise by the Central Government or a person 
authorised by it of the powers conferred by section 100, or as to terms 
for the use of an invention for the purposes of government  
thereunder  or  as  to  the  right  of  any  person  to receive any part of 
a payment made in pursuance of sub -section (3) of that section or as 
to the amount of compensation payable for the acquisition of an 
invention or a patent under section102, may be referred to the High 
Court by either party to the d ispute in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the rules of the High Court. 
b.  In  any proceedings  under this  section  to  which  the Central 
Government is a party, the Central Government may— 
i. if the patentee is a party to the proceedings, petition by  way of 
counter-claim for revocation of the patent on any ground upon 
which a patent may be revoked under section 64; and 
ii. whether   a   patentee   is   or   is   not   a   party  to   the 
proceedings, put in issue the validity of the patent without 
petitioning for its revocation. 
c.   If in such proceedings as aforesaid any question arises whether an 
invention has been recorded, tested or tried as is mentioned in section 
100, and the disclosure of any document regarding the invention, or 
of any evidence  of the test or trial thereof, would, in the opinion of 
the Central Government, be prejudicial to the   public   interest,   the   
disclosure   may   be   made confidentially to the advocate of the other 
party or to an independent expert mutually agreed upon. 
d.  In  determining  under  this  section  any  dispute  between  the 
Central Government and any person as to terms for the use of an 
invention for the purposes of government, the High Court shall have 
Section 
102, 103

===== PAGE 146 =====
146 
 
regard to any benefit or compensation which that p erson or any 
person from whom he derives title, may have received, or may be 
entitled to receive, directly or indirectly in respect of the use of the 
invention in question for the purposes of government. 
e.   In any proceedings under this section, the High Court may at any time 
order the whole proceedings or any question or issue of fact arising 
therein to be referred to an official referee, commissioner or an 
arbitrator on such terms as the High Court may direct, and references 
to the High Court in the for egoing provisions of this section shall be 
construed accordingly. 
f.   Where the invention claimed in a patent was made by a person who at 
time it was made was in the service of the Central Government or of a 
State Government or was an employee of a govern ment undertaking 
and the subject -matter of the invention is certified by the relevant 
government or the principal officer of the government undertaking to 
be connected with the work done in the course of the normal duties 
of the government servant or emplo yee of the government 
undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this section, 
any dispute of the nature referred to in sub -section (1) relating to the 
invention shall be disposed of by the Central Government 
conformably to the provisions of this section so far as may be 
applicable, but before doing so the Central Government shall give an 
opportunity to the patentee and such other parties as it considers have 
an interest in the matter to be heard.

===== PAGE 147 =====
147 
 
Chapter 16: Patent Agents 
16.01 Patent Agents 
a.  A  patent  application  can be  filed  and  prosecuted  by  an  
Applicant himself or through a registered Indian patent agent. The 
Register of Patent Agents containing the names and addresses of all 
the registered patent agents is available at: www.ipindia.nic.in 
b.  The   Patents   Act   read   with   the   Patents   Rules   prescribe   
the qualifications and the eligibility for becoming a patent agent. In 
order to get registered as a patent agent one has to pass an 
examination con ducted by the Controller General of Patents 
annually. The notification concerning the examination is published 
in the official website www.ipindia.nic.in and also in at least one 
prominent newspaper. 
c.   In order to apply for registration as a patent agen t, one has to be a 
citizen of India, above the age of 21, and should have a Bachelor‗s 
degree in Science or Engineering from a recognized Indian 
University or possesses such other equivalent qualifications as the 
Central Government may specify in this behalf. 
d. All matters relating to registration and subsequent procedures 
regarding patent agents are dealt by the Office of the Controller 
General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks, Mumbai. 
Particulars to be contained in the Register of Patent Agents: 
1)  The register of patent agents maintained under section 125 shall 
contain the name, nationality, address of the principal place of 
business, addresses of branch offices, if any, the qualifications, the 
date of registration of every registered patent agent and  the details 
of their renewal of registration and any other particulars so specified 
by the Controller. 
2)  Where the register of patent agents is in computer floppies, 
diskettes or any other electronic form, it shall be maintained and 
accessed only by the  person who is duly authorised by the 
Controller and no entry or alteration of any entry or rectification of 
any entry in the said register shall be made by any person who is 
not so authorised by the Controller. 
 
Section 125, 
126, 
127 
Rule 108, 
109

===== PAGE 148 =====
148 
 
 3) R egister of patent agents shall contain  specimen signature s and 
photographs of persons registered as patent agents. 
Application for Registration of Patent Agents : 
(1)   Every person who desires to be registered as a patent agent shall 
make an application in Form 22. 
(2)  The applicant shall fu rnish such other information as may be 
required by the Controller. 
(3) A person desirous to appear in the qualifying examination under 
rule 110 shall make a request to the Controller along with the fee 
specified in the First Schedule after announcement of such 
examination and within the period as may be specified in the 
announcement. 
16.02   Disqualifications for Registration as Patent Agent 
A person shall not be eligible to be regi stered as s patent agent, 
if he– 
a. has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind; 
b.    is an undischarged insolvent; 
c. being  a  discharged  insolvent,  has  not  obtained  from  the  court  
a certificate to the effect that his insolvency was caused by 
misfortune without any misconduct on his part; 
d.   has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or outside 
India of an offence to undergo a term of imprisonment, unless the 
offence of which he has been convicted has been pardoned or 
unless on an application made by h im, the Central Government 
has, by order in this behalf, removed the disability; 
e.  being a legal practitioner, has been guilty of professional misconduct; 
or 
f.    being  a  chartered  accountant,  has  been  guilty  of  negligence  or 
misconduct . 
Rule 114 
16.03 Rights of patent agents 
A patent agent is entitled- 
a.    to practice before the Controller; and 
b.  to prepare all documents, transact all business and discharge such 
other functions as may be prescribed in connection with any 
proceedings before the Controller under this Act. 
Section 127

===== PAGE 149 =====
149 
 
16.04 Subscription and verification of certain documents by a Patent 
Agent  
All applications and communications to the Controller under this Act 
may be signed by a patent agent authorized in writing in this beh alf by 
the person concerned. 
Section 128 
16.05 Restrictions on Practice as Patent Agents 
Only a person registered as a patent agent is authorized to practice. In 
the case of a partnership, the firm may be described or held out as 
Patent Agent, only if all  of the partners of the Firm are registered as 
patent agents. No company or other body corporate shall practice, 
describe itself or hold itself out as Patent Agents or permit itself to be 
so described or held out.  
Section 129 
16.06 Power of Controller to refuse to deal with certain agents 
The Controller may refuse to recognize as agent in respect of any 
business under this Act: 
a.  any individual whose name has been removed from, and not 
restored to, the register; 
b.   any person who has been convicted of  an offence under section 
123 of the Act; 
c.  any person, not being registered as a patent agent, who in the 
opinion of the   Controller is engaged wholly or mainly in acting as 
agent in applying for patents in India or elsewhere in the name or 
for the benefit of the person by whom he is employed; 
d.  any company or firm, if any person whom the Controller could 
refuse to recognize   as agent in respect of any business under this 
Act, is acting as a director or manager of the  company or is a 
partner in the firm. 
e.    any person who neither resides nor has a place of business in India. 
Section 131 
16.07 Power of Controller to remove the name of a Patent Agent: 
a. The name of any person from the Register can be   removed if the 
Controller is satisfied that:– 
 
i. his/her name has been entered in the Register by error on  
account of misrepresentation or suppression of material fact; 
or 
Section 130. 
Rule 116.

===== PAGE 150 =====
150 
 
 
ii.  he/she has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to a 
term of imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in his 
professional capacity which in the opinion of the Controller 
renders him unfit to be kept in the register. 
 b.  The Controller shall take such decision after giving that person a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and after any further 
inquiry, as he thinks fit to make. 
Removal of a name from the Register of patent agents- 
 
1)  The Controller may delete from the register of patent agents, the 
name of any patent agent- 
(a)   from whom a request has been received to that effect; or 
 
(b)   when he is dead; or 
 
(c)    when the Controller has removed the name of a person 
under sub-section (1) of section 130; or 
(d)   if he has defaulted in the payment of fees specified in rule 
115, by more than three months after they are due; or 
(e)    if he ceases to be a citizen of India: 
 
               Provided that except under clause(a) and (b), before removing 
the n ame of any person from the register of patent agents 
under this  rule, such person shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
 
2)  The decision of the removal of the name of any person from the 
Register of Patent Agents shall be published and shall be 
communicated to the person concerned. 
16.08 Restoration of names of Patent Agents  
a. Restoration of names of persons removed fro m the register of 
Patent Agents can be made by the Controller on Application made 
in form 23 within two months from the date of such removal. 
b. The restoration of name to the register shall be published on official 
website and communicated to the person concerned. 
c. If the name of a person is entered in the register of Patents Agents, 
his name shall be continued therein for a period of one year from 
the date on which his last annual fee became due. 
Rule 117 
Form-23

===== PAGE 151 =====
151 
 
16.09 Alteration of names of Patent Agents  
1)  A patent agent may apply for the alteration of his name, address of 
the principal place of business and branch offices, if any, or the 
qualifications entered in the register of patent agents, e-mail address, 
telephone number, fax number or any other par ticulars under sub -
section (1) of section 125. On receipt of such application and the 
fee specified therefor in the First Schedule for such request for 
alteration of particulars, the Controller shall cause the necessary 
alterations to be made in the register of patent agents. 
2)  Every alteration made in the register of patent agents shall be 
published. 
Section 125 
Rule 118

===== PAGE 152 =====
152 
 
Chapter 17: Offences and Penalties 
17.01 Contravention of Section 35 or 39 
If any person fails to comply with any direction given under section 
35 or makes or causes to be made an application for the grant of a 
patent in contravention of section 39, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
Section 118 
17.02 Falsification of entries in register, etc. 
 If any person makes, a false entry in any register kept under the 
Patents Act or provides any writing or evidence as a result of which 
the entry in the register results into a false entry, knowing the entry 
or writing to be false, then he is punishable with imprisonment for 
a term that may extend to two years or with fine or with both. 
Section 119 
17.03 Unauthorized Claim of Patent Rights 
If any person falsely represents that any article sold by him is 
patented in India or is the subject of an Application for a Patent in 
India, he shall be punishable with fine that may extend to rupees 
one lakh. 
Section 120 
17.04 Wrongful use of words, "Patent Office" 
If any person uses on his place of business or any document i ssued 
by him which would reasonably lead to the belief that either his 
place of business is the Patent Office or is officially connected with 
the Patent Office, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term that may extend to 6 months, or with fine, or with both. 
Section 121 
17.05 Refusal or failure to supply information 
If any person refuses or fails to furnish information as required 
under Sections 100(5) and 146, he shall be punishable with fine 
which may go up to rupees ten lakh.  
Section 100(5) provides that any person including Government 
undertaking using a patented invention for the purpose of 
Government has to furnish any information on the use of 
invention as required by the Central Government and Section 146 
provides  that  the  patentee  h as  to  furnish  a  statement  
regarding  the working of the patented invention in a commercial 
Section 122 
Form-27

===== PAGE 153 =====
153 
 
scale in India in Form 27. This has to be done annually within 3 
months of the end of each calendar year for that calendar year. If 
he furnishes false informati on knowingly he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment that may extend to 6 months or with fine or 
with both. 
17.06 Practice by non-registered persons 
Any person practicing as a Patent Agent without registering himself 
as such is liable  to be punished with a fine of rupees one lakh for 
the first offence and rupees five lakh for subsequent offence. 
Section 123 
17.07 Offences by Companies 
a.  When an offence is committed by a company, the company as 
well as every person in charge of, and responsible to the 
company for the conduct of its business at the time of the 
commission of the offence, shall be deemed to be guilty and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
     However, if such person proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of the office, he shall not be liable. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything contained above, where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and i t is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent, 
connivance or that the commission of the offence is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, 
secretary or other office of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Section 124

===== PAGE 154 =====
154 
 
Chapter 18: General Powers of Controller 
18.01 Certain Powers of  Civil Court to Controllers: 
Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Controller in any 
proceedings before him under this Act, have the powers of a Civil 
Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 
No. 5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely: 
a. Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
b.   Requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
c. Receiving evidence on affidavits; 
d.  Issuing  commissions  for  the  examination  of  witnesses  of 
documents; 
e. Awarding costs; 
f. Reviewing his own decision on application made within the 
prescribed time and in the prescribed manner; 
g.  Setting aside an order passed ex -parte on application made within 
the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner; 
h.   Any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 
Section 77 
Rule 136 
Order 
XLVII of 
CPC, 1908. 
18.02 Awarding Costs 
a.   Any order for costs awarded by the Controller in exercise of the 
powers conferred upon him is executable as a decree of a civil 
court. In al l proceedings before the Controller, costs may be 
awarded by the Controller, as he considers reasonable, having 
regard to all the circumstances of the case. 
b.   However, the amount of costs awarded in respect of any matter set 
forth in the Fourth Schedule  shall not exceed the amount 
specified therein. 
c.  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  (a)  above,  the 
Controller may, in his discretion, award a compensatory cost in 
any proceeding before him which in his opinion is false or 
vexatious. 
Section 
77(1)(e) 
Rule 63, 
136 
18.03 Review 
a.  Any person considering himself aggrieved by any order or decree 
 
Section

===== PAGE 155 =====
155 
 
of the Controller from which an appeal is allowed but no appeal 
has been preferred, or from which no appeal is allowed, and who, 
from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence 
which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within his 
knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the 
order or decree was passed or order made, or on account of some 
mistake or error apparent  on  the   face  of  the  record  or  for  
any  other  sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the 
decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review 
of the order or decree to the Controller. 
b.  An application to the Controller for the review  of his decision 
under clause (f) of sub -section (1) of section 77 shall be made 
within one month from the date of communication of such 
decision to the applicant or within such further period not 
exceeding one month thereafter as the Controller may on a 
request allow. 
c.  An application for review shall be accompanied by a statement 
setting forth the grounds on which the review is sought. 
d.   Where  the  decision  in  question  concerns  any  other  person  in 
addition to the applicant, the Controller sha ll forthwith transmit a 
copy of each of the application and the statement to the other 
person concerned. 
e.   An application to the Controller for setting aside an order passed 
by him ex -parte under clause (g) of sub -section (1) of section 77 
shall be made within one month from the date of communication 
of such order to the applicant or within such further period not 
exceeding one month as the Controller may on a request allow 
and shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds 
on which the ap plication is based. Where the order concerns any 
other person in addition to the applicant, the Controller shall, 
forthwith transmit a copy each of the application and the 
statement to the other person concerned. 
77(1)(f). 
Rule 130. 
Form-4, 24. 
Section 114 
& Order 
XLVII of 
CPC, 1908. 
18.04 Petition for Obviating an Irregularity 
Any document for the amendment of which no special provision is 
made in the Act may be amended and any irregularity in procedure, 
Rule 137. 
Nippon 
Steel

===== PAGE 156 =====
156 
 
which in the opinion of the Controller may  be obviated without 
detriment to the interests of any person, may be corrected if the 
Controller thinks fit and upon such terms as he may direct. 
Corporation 
Vs. Union 
of India 
18.05 Mention of Inventor in Patent 
If  the  controlle r  is  satisfied,  upon  a  request  or  claim  made  in 
accordance with the provisions of this section, 
i)    that the person in respect of or by whom the request or claim 
is made is the inventor of an invention in respect of which 
application for  a  pat ent  has  been  made,  or  of  a  
substantial  part  of  that invention; and 
ii)   that the application for the patent is a direct consequence of his 
being the inventor,  
    the Controller shall, subject to the provisions of this section, cause 
him to be mentioned as inventor in any patent granted in 
pursuance of  the application in the  complete specificat ion and in 
the Register of patents: 
a.   Such a request or claim shall be accompanied  by  a  statement 
setting out the circumstances under which the claim is made. 
b.  However, the mention of any person as inventor under this 
section shall not confer or derogate from any rights under the 
patent. 
c.   A request that any person shall be mentioned as aforesaid may 
be made in the prescribed manner by the app licant for the 
patent or (where the person alleged to be the inventor is not 
the applicant or one of the applicants) by the applicant and 
that person. 
d.  If any person [other than a person in respect of whom a 
request in relation to the application in que stion has been 
made under sub - section (2)] desires to be mentioned as 
aforesaid, he may make a claim in the prescribed manner in 
that behalf. 
e. A request or claim under the foregoing provisions of this 
Section 28. 
Rules 57-63, 
66-70.  
Form 8.

===== PAGE 157 =====
157 
 
section shall be made before the grant of patent. 
f.   Where such a claim is made, the Controller shall give notice of 
the claim to every applicant for the patent (not being the 
claimant) and to any other person whom the Controller may 
consider to be interested and before deciding upon any such 
request or c laim, the Controller shall, if required, hear the 
person in respect of or by whom the request or claim is made, 
and also any person to whom notice of the claim has been 
given as aforesaid. 
g.  Where any person has been mentioned as inventor in pursuance 
of such an application, any other person who alleges that he 
ought not to have been so mentioned may at any time apply to 
the Controller for a certificate to that effect, and the 
Controller may, after hearing, if required, any person whom he 
may consider to be interested, issue such a certificate, and if 
he does so, he shall rectify the specification and the register 
accordingly. 
h.   The procedure specified in rules 55A and 57 to 63 relating to 
the filing of  notice  of  opposition,  written  statement,  rep ly 
statement,  leaving  evidence,  hearing and cost (except the 
procedural part related to Opposition Board included under 
rule  62 (1) and 62 (5) ) shall, so far as the case may be, apply 
to the hearing of such a claim or application as they apply to 
the opposition proceedings subject to the modification that 
reference to patentee shall be construed as the person making 
the claim, or an application, as the case may be. 
i.   Any mention of the inventor under sub -section (1) of section 
28 shall be made in th e relevant documents in the following 
form namely:- 
     The   inventor   of   this   invention/substantial   part   of   
this invention within the meaning of section 28 of the 
Patents Act,1970, is……of……. 
18.06 Directions Not Otherwise Prescribed 
a.   Where   for   the   proper   prosecution   or   completion   of   any 
Rule 128

===== PAGE 158 =====
158 
 
proceedings under the Act or these rules, the Controller is of the 
opinion that it is necessary for a party to such proceedings to 
perform an Act, f ile a document or produce evidence, for which 
provision has not been made in the Act or these rules, he may, by 
notice in writing, require such party to perform the Act, file the 
document or produce the evidence specified in such notice. 
b.   Where an appl icant or a party to a proceeding desires to be heard 
or  not  heard,  the  Controller  may,  at  any time,  require  him to 
submit his statement in writing giving such information as the 
Controller may deem necessary within the time specified by him. 
18.07 Exercise of Discretionary Power by the Controller 
a.  Before acting adverse to any party, the Controller shall give an 
opportunity of being heard to the party. The discretionary powers 
shall  be  exercised  with  due  care  and  caution  and  no t  in  an 
arbitrary manner. Such reasons shall be taken judiciously and the 
reasons shall be recorded in the file. However, this will not apply 
to  actions  resulting  from provisions  in  the  Act  and Rules. 
b.   A party desiring a hearing shall make the  request for such hearing 
to the Controller at least ten days in advance of the expiry of the 
time-limit specified in respect of the proceeding. 
c.   Before exercising any discretionary power under the Act or these 
rules which is likely to affect an applicant for a patent or a party to 
a proceeding adversely, the Controller shall give such applicant or 
party, a hearing, after giving him or them, ten days' notice of such 
hearing ordinarily. 
d.  An applicant for patent or a party to a proceeding may make a 
request for adjournment of the hearing with reasonable cause 
along with the prescribed fee prescribed in First Schedule, at least 
three days before the date of hearing. 
e.   The Controller, if he thinks fit to do so, and upon such terms as he 
may direct, may  adjourn the hearing not more than twice and 
intimate the parties accordingly. Each adjournment shall not be 
for more than thirty days. 
Section 80. 
Rule 129, 
129A.

===== PAGE 159 =====
159 
 
18.08 Power of Controller to Correct Clerical Errors, etc. 
a.  Without prejudice to the pro visions contained in sections 57 and 
59 as regards amendment of applications for patents or complete 
specifications or other documents relating thereto and subject to 
the provisions of section 44, the Controller may, in accordance 
with the provisions of this section, correct any clerical error in any 
patent or in any specification or other document filed in 
pursuance of  such  application  or  in  any  application  for  a  
patent  or  any clerical error in any matter which is entered in the 
register. 
b.  A correction may be made in pursuance of this section either upon 
a request in writing made by any person interested and 
accompanied by the prescribed fee, or without such a request. 
c.  Where the Controller proposes to make any such correction as 
aforesaid otherwise than in pursuance of a request, he shall give 
notice of the proposal to  the patentee or the applicant for the 
patent, as the case may be, and to any other person who appears 
to him to be concerned, and shall give them an opportunity to be 
heard before making the correction. 
d.   Where a request is made under section 78 for the correction of 
any error in a patent or application for a patent or any document 
filed in pursuance of such an application, and it appears to the 
Controller that the correct ion would materially alter the meaning 
or scope of the document to which the request relates and ought 
not to be made without notice to persons affected thereby, he 
shall require notice of the nature of the proposed correction to be 
published in the official journal. 
e. Such  a  request  for  the  correction  of  a  clerical  error  in  any 
document shall be accompanied by a copy of the document 
highlighting the corrections clearly along with the prescribed fees. 
f. Within the prescribed time after any such  publication as aforesaid 
any person interested may give notice to the Controller of 
opposition to the request, and, where such notice of opposition is 
given, the Controller shall give notice thereof to the person by 
 
Section 78. 
Rule 122, 
124.

===== PAGE 160 =====
160 
 
whom the request was made, and shall gi ve to him and to the 
opponent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case. 
g.  The procedure specified in rules 58 to 63 relating to the filing of 
reply statement, leaving evidence, hearing and costs shall, so far as 
may be, will be applicable to  the above proceedings , except the 
procedural part related to Opposition Board provided under rule  
62 (1) and 62 (5).

===== PAGE 161 =====
161 
 
Chapter 19: General Services 
19.01 General Services 
a. Patent Office provides certain statutory and non- statutory services 
for the dissemination of information related to patent processing. 
b.   It  may be  noted that references to some  of these services  have 
already been made in the relevant Chapters. 
c.  These services are enumerated in the following para graphs as per 
standards set by the Patent Office. 
 
19.02 Official Journal 
 Every Friday the Controller publishes the Official Patent Journal 
electronically, which is made available on the official website of the 
Patent Office (www.ipindia.nic.in). 
Section 145 
19.03 Information relating to Patent Applications and Patents 
a.  At the request of a person (on plain paper), the Controller provides 
the following information regarding a Patent or an Application for 
a Patent. Separate requests shall be made in respect of each item: 
i. as to when a Complete  Specification   following   Provisional 
Specification has been filed or an Application for Patent is 
deemed to be abandoned; 
ii.    as to when the information under Section 8 has been filed; 
iii.  as to when Pub lication of Application has been made under 
Section 11 A;  
iv.  as to when an Application has been  withdrawn  under 
Section 11B; 
v. as to when a request for examination has been made under 
Section 11B; 
vi. as to when the examination report has been issued  under 
Section 12; 
vii.  as to when an Application for Patent has been refused; 
viii.  as to when a Patent has been granted; 
ix. as to when a renewal fee has been paid; 
x. as to when the term of a Patent has expired or shall expire; 
xi. as  to  when  an  e ntry  has  been  made  in  the  Register  or 
Application has been made for the making of such entry; or 
 
Section 153. 
Rule 134.

===== PAGE 162 =====
162 
 
xii.   as  to  when  any  Application  is  made  or  action  taken 
involving  an  entry  in  the  Register,  publication  in  the 
Official   Journal   o r   otherwise,   if   the   nature   of   the 
Application or action is specified in the request. 
b.  The report of the Examiner to the Controller under Section 12 is 
not open to public unless directed by a Court of Law. 
c.  Except (b) above, most of the in formation relating to patents is 
available   on   the   official   website.   However,   the   
information available on the official website of the Patent Office 
would not be sufficient  for  legal  proceedings,  for  which  a  
person  may  take recourse to (a) above. 
19.04 Inspection and supply of copies of documents 
a.   After the publication of application, the application along with the 
complete specification, provisional specification, drawing, if any, 
and the abstract may be i nspected at the appropriate Patent 
Office. 
b.   After the grant of a patent, the application along with the 
complete specification, provisional specification, drawing, if any, 
and abstract and related thereto may be inspected at the 
concerned Patent Office. 
c.   Request for inspection may be made in Form-30 along with the 
prescribed fee. 
d.   A person may obtain copies of any document open to public 
upon payment of the prescribed fee. 
e.   Certified copy of any document open to public may be obtained 
upon p ayment of prescribed fee.  The certified copy of any 
document issued by the Patent Office with its seal is admitted in 
evidence in all Courts and in all proceedings in lieu of the original 
document. 
f.   Register of Patents may be inspected during the worki ng hours of 
the Patent Office by making a written application along with the 
prescribed fee. 
g.   Certified copies of any entry in the Register is available upon the 
payment of prescribed fee. 
 
Section 72, 
147,. 
Rule 27, 74-
A, 
, 133 
Form 30

===== PAGE 163 =====
163 
 
h.   Certified copies of any entry in the register, or certific ates of, or 
extracts from patents, specifications and other public documents 
in the patent office, or from registers and other records including 
records in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic 
form kept there, may be furnished by the Contro ller on a request 
therefor made to him and on payment of the fee specified 
therefor in the First Schedule: Provided that certified copies shall 
be issued in the order in which the request is filed. 
i.   Notwithstanding anything contained above, certified copies can be 
furnished within a period of one week if such request is made 
along with the fee specified therefore in the First Schedule. 
19.05  Annual Report of the Patent Office 
The Patent Office publishes an annual report comprising statistical 
information pertaining to the activities of Patent Office. Such report 
is placed before both the Houses of Parliament, whereupon the 
report is made available on the official website. 
Section 155 
19.06 Information available at the Website 
The official website (www.ipindia.nic.in) provides the following 
information: 
a. Indian  Patent  Advanced Search System (inPASS)   provides 
information on: 
i.    Granted Patents; 
ii.   Details of Published Patent Applications with status; 
iii.   Status of granted patents 
iv.   e-Register of Patents 
     In addition, the following information is also available :  
 News & Events/ Circulars by the Controller General  
 Manuals/ Guidelines 
 Act & Rules.  
 Controller‘s decisions.  
  Ceased and Lapsed patents 
 Dynamic patent utilities 
 List of registered Patent Agents. 
 Mobile App. A mobile App named ―Intellectual Property

===== PAGE 164 =====
164 
 
India‖ has been developed and link is available on website for 
both android and iOS versi ons. Android version could also 
be downloaded from Google play store. 
 A link for video conferencing on website.  
 Feedback system

===== PAGE 165 =====
165 
 
Chapter 20 : Scientific Advisors 
20.01 Scientific Advisors 
a.   In any suit for infringement or in any proceeding before a Court 
under this Act, the Court may at any time, suo -moto or on an 
application made by a party, appoint an independent Scientific 
Advisor to assist the Court or to inquire and report upon any 
such questions of fact or of opinion (not involving a question 
of interpretation of law) as it may formulate for the purpose. 
b.   The remuneration of the Scientific Advisor shall be fixed by the 
Court and shall include the cost of preparing/making a report 
and appropriate fee for Scientific Advisor for any day on whi ch 
he/she may be required to attend the hearing of the Court, and 
such remuneration shall be defrayed out of funds provided by 
the Parliament under law for such purpose. 
 
Section 115 
20.02 Roll of Scientific Advisors 
(1)  The Controller shall maintain a r oll of scientific advisers for the 
purpose of section 115. The roll shall be updated annually. The 
roll shall contain the names, addresses, specimen signatures and 
photographs of scientific advisers, their designations, 
information regarding their educatio nal qualifications, the 
disciplines of their specialisation and their technical, practical 
and research experience. 
(2)   A person shall be qualified to have his name entered in the roll 
of scientific advisers, if he- 
 (i)  holds a degree in science, engin eering or technology or 
equivalent; 
 (ii)  has at least fifteen years' technical, practical or research 
experience; and 
 (iii)  he holds or has held a responsible post in a scientific or 
technical department of the Central or State Government 
or in any organisation. 
        The panel/list is also accessible / made ava ilable on the 
official website of the Patent Office at url: 
www.ipindia.nic.in. 
Rule 103, 
103A

===== PAGE 166 =====
166 
 
(3) Disqualifications for inclusion in the roll of scientific 
advisers 
A person shall not be eligible to be included in the roll of scientific 
advisors, if he - 
(i)   has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound 
mind; 
(ii)    is an undischarged insolvent; 
(iii)  being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from t he 
court a certificate to the effect that his insolvency was 
caused by misfortune without any misconduct on his part; 
(iv)   has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or 
outside India of an offence to undergo a term of 
imprisonment, unless th e offence of which he has been 
convicted has been pardoned or unless on an application 
made by him, the Central Government has, by order in this 
behalf, removed the disability; or 
(v)  has been guilty of professional misconduct. 
20.03 Qualifications and Procedure for empanelment/enrollment 
a.  Any person who is qualified to have his/her name entered in the 
panel/list/roll of scientific advisors. However, where the 
Controller is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to 
do so, he ma y, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
relax any of the  qualifications  specified  above,  with  respect  
to  any person, if such person is otherwise well qualified. 
b.  Any  person  interested  may  apply  at  any  time  to  the 
Controller  for  inclusion  of  his/her  name  in  the  roll  of 
scientific advisors by furnishing his/her bio-data. 
c.   The list/roll is updated and published annually. 
Rule 103, 
104,105, 106 
20.04 Removal from the roll/panel of Scientific Advisor 
a.  The Controller may remove the name of any person from the 
roll of scientific advisors, if— 
i. such person makes a request for such removal; or 
ii. the Controller is satisfied that his/her name has been 
entered in the roll by error or account of 
misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact; or 
Rule 107

===== PAGE 167 =====
167 
 
iii. such person has been convicted for an offence and 
sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  or  has  been 
guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity and the 
Controller is of the opinion that his/her name should  be 
removed from the roll: 
iv.    such person is dead:  
       Provided that except in the cases falling under clause ( i) 
and (iv) above, before removing the name of any person 
from the roll of scientific advisers under this rule, such 
person shall be give n a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. 
b.    Before removing the name of any person from the roll of 
      scientific advisors under this rule, such person shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.

===== PAGE 168 =====
168 
 
Chapter 21: Miscellaneous provisions 
21.01 Affidavits 
a.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary as and when directed by 
the Controller, in all proceedings before the Controller under this 
Act, evidence shall be given by way of an affidavit. 
b.  In cases where the Cont roller deems it appropriate to do so, he may 
take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, evidence by way of an 
affidavit, or may allow any party to be cross -examined on the 
contents stated in his/her affidavit. 
c.  The affidavits required to be filed  before the Controller of Patents 
under the Act or rules shall be duly sworn in the manner as 
prescribed under Clause (e) below. 
d.   Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as the deponent is able, of 
his own knowledge, to prove except in interlocutory  matters, where 
statements of belief of the deponent may be admitted, provided the 
grounds thereof are given. 
e.   Affidavits shall be sworn to as follows: 
  i)   In India - before any Court or person having by law authority 
to receive evidence, or before any officer empowered by such 
court as aforesaid to administer oaths or to take affidavits; 
 ii)   In any country or place outside India - before a diplomatic or 
consular officer, within the meaning of the Diplomatic and 
Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948 (41 of1948); in 
such country or place or before a notary public of  the  country  
or  place,  recognised  by  the  Central Government under 
section 14 of the Notaries Act, 1952 (53  of  1952);  or  before  a  
Judge  or  Magistrate  of  the country or place. 
f.  Alterations and interlineations shall, before an Affidavit is sworn to 
or affirmed to be authenticated by the initials of the person before 
whom the Affidavit is sworn to. 
 
Section 79. 
Rule 126. 
 
 
 
Diplomatic 
and 
Consular 
Officers 
(Oaths and 
Fees) Act, 
1948. 
 
 
Notification
s u/s 14 of 
the 
Notaries 
Act, 
1952. 
21.02 Exhibits 
Where there are exhibits to be filed in an opposition matter or any 
Rule 127

===== PAGE 169 =====
169 
 
other proceeding, a copy or impression of each exhibit shall be 
supplied to  the other party at  his  r equest  and  expense;  if copies or 
impressions of the exhibits cannot conveniently be furnished, the 
originals shall be left with the Controller for inspection by the person 
interested by prior appointment. The exhibits in original , if not already 
left with Controller, shall be produced at the hearing. 
21.03 Officers and employees of Patent Office – Duties 
An officer or employee of the Patent Office shall not, except when 
required or authorised by this Act or under a direction in writing of the 
Central Government or Appellate Board or the Controller or by order 
of a Court— 
a.  furnish information on a matter which is being, or has been, dealt 
with under this Act; or 
b.   prepare  to  assist  in  the  preparation  of  a  document required or 
permitted by or under this Act to be lodged in the Patent Office ; or 
c.    conduct a search in the records of the Patent Office. 
Section 76 
21.04  Hearing to be in public 
Where the hearing is held before the Controller in respect of any dispute 
between  two  or  more  parties relating to  an  application  for  a patent 
or to any matter in connection with a patent  after the date of the 
publication of the complete specification, the hearing of the dispute 
shall be in public unless the Controller, after consultat ion with the 
parties to the dispute who appear in person or are represented at the 
hearing, otherwise directs. 
Rule 139 
21.05 Agency – Power of Attorney 
a)   Authorisation of an agent for the purposes of the Act and the rules 
shall be made in Form 26 or i n the form of a Power of Attorney 
within a period of 3 months from the date of filing of such 
application or document, failing which no action shall be taken on 
such application or documents for further processing, till such 
deficiency is removed. 
b)   Where  any  such  authorisation  has  been  made,  service upon   
the   agent   of   any   document   relating   to   the proceeding or 
matter under the Act or the rules shall be deemed to be the service 
Rule 135. 
Form-26.

===== PAGE 170 =====
170 
 
upon the person so authorising and all communications d irected to 
be made to a person in respect of the proceeding or matter may be 
addressed to such agent, and all appearances before the Controller 
relating thereto may be made by or through such agent. 
c.   If   it   is   considered   necessary,  the office c an require   the   
personal signature or presence of an applicant, opponent or party to 
such proceeding or matter.

===== PAGE 171 =====
171 
 
Chapter 22: Time Limits 
22.01 Time limits 
Time   limits   for   various   actions   while   prosecuting   a   patent 
application and also for post grant procedures have been either 
specifically provided in the Patents Act or prescribed through the 
Patents Rules. These time limits are required to be followed strictly by 
every person concerned. Failure to adhere to the legal ly imposed time 
limits may turn out to be detrimental to the interests of the applicants, 
patentees or any other person interested. 
 
22.02 Petition for extension of time 
(1)  Except for the time prescribed in clause (i) of sub -rule (4) of rule 20, 
sub-rule (6) of rule 20, rule 21, sub -rules (1), (5) and (6) of rule 24B, 
sub-rules (10) and (11) of rule 24C, sub -rule (4) of rule 55, sub -rule 
(1A) of rule 80 and sub -rules (1) and (2) of rule 130, the time 
prescribed by these rules for doing of any act or the taking of any 
proceeding thereunder may be extended by the Controller for a 
period of one month, if he thinks it fit to do so and upon such 
terms as he may direct. 
(2)   Any request for extension of time prescribed by these rules for 
doing of any act or th e taking of any proceeding thereunder shall be 
made before the expiry of such time prescribed in these rules. 
Rule 138

===== PAGE 172 =====
172 
 
22.03: Time limits prescribed by the Patents Act, 1970 and Patents Rules, 2003 
S.N. Description Time Provision 
1. Proof of right to make an 
application 
Six months from the date of Filling of 
application 
Section 7(2) 
Rule10 
2. Statement and undertaking 
Regarding foreign applications 
Six months from the date of Filing of 
application 
Section 8(1)(a) 
Rule 12(1A) 
3. Subsequent information 
Corresponding to foreign filing 
Six months from the date of Filing of 
application outside India 
Section 
8(1)(b) 
Rule 12(2) 
4. Information relating to 
objections in respect of novelty, 
patentability etc. in foreign filing 
Six months from the date of 
communication by Controller 
Section 8(2) 
Rule 12(3) 
5. Filing a complete specification 
after filing provisional 
specification 
Twelve months from the date 
of filling of the Provisional 
Specification 
Section 9(1) 
6. Declaration of Inventorship 
(Form 5) 
With the complete specification or 
within one month from the date of 
filing of the complete specification as 
the Controller may allow on an 
application made in Form-4  
Rule 13(6) 
7. Reference to deposit of 
biological material 
Three months from the date of filing of 
application 
Section10(4) 
Rule 13(8) 
8. Convention application Twelve months from the date of filing 
of the basic application 
Section 135(1) 
9. Convention application (in case 
of  multiple priorities) 
Twelve months from the date of filing 
of first filed basic application 
Section 135(1) 
10. Convention application 
(cognate) 
Twelve months from the date of earliest 
filed application 
Section 135(2) 
11. PCT national phase application Thirty one months from the Priority 
date 
Rule 20(4)(i) 
12. Priority document (for 
convention application) 
Three months from the date of 
communication from the Controller 
Section 138(1) 
Rule 121 
13. Publication of application Ordinarily within one month from the 
expiry of eighteen months from the date 
of filing or priority date, whichever is 
earlier, or within one month from the 
date of request for early publication.  
Rule 24, Rule 
24-A 
14. Withdrawal of application to 
prevent publication 
Fifteen months from date of Filing or 
priority, whichever is earlier 
Section 11-
A(3)(c) 
Request for withdrawal of 
application  
Any time before the grant of Patent Section 11-
B(4), Rule 26 
Request for withdrawal and  
refund of Fee 
In case withdrawal is requested after 
filing Request for examination but before 
issuance of FER, then fee is refunded as 
prescribed in the First Schedule 
Rule 7(4A) ,  
Rule 26

===== PAGE 173 =====
173 
 
15. Request for examination Forty eight months from the date of 
filing or priority, whichever is earlier 
Section 11-B 
Rule 24-B 
16. Request for examination, where 
secrecy direction imposed 
Forty eight months from the date of 
filing or priority or within  sixth months 
from the date of revocation of secrecy 
direction, whichever expires later 
Rule 24-
B(1)(iii) 
17. Request for examination 
(Divisional Application) 
Forty eight months from date 
of filing or priority of first mentioned 
application, or within six months 
from date of filing of further 
application, which ever expires later. 
Rule 24-
B(1)(iv) 
18. Time within which Examiner 
makes report to Controller 
Ordinarily within one month but not 
exceeding three months from the date 
of such reference 
Rule 24-
B(2)(ii) 
19. Controller disposes off the 
report of Examiner 
Ordinarily within one month from the 
date of receipt of report 
Rule 24-B(2) 
(iii) 
20. First Examination Report (FER) 
to be sent by the Controller to 
applicant 
Within one month from the date of 
disposal of the report of examiner by 
the Controller 
Rule 24-B(3) 
21. Time for complying with all 
requirements imposed by the 
Act 
Six months from the date Of issuance 
of the FER 
Section 21(1)  
Rule 24-B(5) 
22 Extension Time for complying 
with all requirements  
Maximum extension up to three months 
can be availed only once,  on a request 
made in Form 4 , if requested before 
the expiry of prescribed time under Rule 
24B(5) 
Section 21(1)  
Rule 24-B(6) 
23. Time, after publication, before 
Expiry of which no patent is 
granted 
Six months from the date of 
publication 
Rule 55(1A) 
24 Pre-grant opposition Any time before the grant of patent Section 25(1) 
25. Reply statement and evidence by 
applicant (pre-grant opposition) 
Three months from the date Of notice 
of the Controller 
Rule 55(4) 
26. Decision by Controller upon 
pre-grant opposition 
Ordinarily within one month 
from completion of the proceedings 
Rule 55(5) 
27. Notice of opposition (post-grant 
opposition) 
Before the expiry of one year from the 
date of publication of grant of patent 
Section 25(2) 
    28. Reply statement by patentee Two months from receipt of 
opponent‗s written statement 
Rule 58(1) 
29. Reply evidence by opponent One month from date of delivery of 
patentee‗s reply statement 
Rule 59 
30. Opposition Board submits 
report 
Three months from the date on which 
documents were forwarded to the Board 
Rule 56(4) 
31. Periodical review of secrecy 
directions 
Every six months Section 36(1) 
32. Controller disposes permission Within a period of twenty-one days Section 39

===== PAGE 174 =====
174 
 
for filing abroad from the date of filing of such request Rule 71 
33. Time after which no permission 
is required for filing abroad 
Six weeks after filing the 
application in India, where no direction 
for secrecy  is imposed or application 
has not been referred to Department 
of Atomic Energy (DAE) 
Section 39(1) 
34. Payment of  due renewal fee, 
where patent h as been granted 
after the expiry of two  years 
from date of filing 
Three months from the date 
of recordal in Register of Patents 
Section 142(4) 
35. Extension in time for payment 
of renewal fee, where patent has 
been granted after expiry of two 
years from date of filing 
Extendable by maximum six 
months 
Section 142(4) 
36. Time for payment of the 
renewal fee 
Before expiry of the nth year from 
date of patent in respect of the (n+1) 
th year 
Rule 80(1) 
37. Extension in time for payment 
of renewal fee 
Maximum six months Rule 80(1A) 
38. Application for restoration of 
patent 
Eighteen months from the date of 
cessation of the patent  
Section 60 
39. Request for hearing by an 
applicant for restoration, where 
prima facie case has not been 
made out 
One month from date of intimation by 
the Controller 
Rule 84(2) 
40. Notice of Opposition against 
restoration 
One month from date of publication 
of application for restoration 
Rule 85(1) 
41. Payment of the unpaid renewal 
fee and additional fee when 
restoration allowed 
One month from date of order Rule 86(1) 
42. Notice of Opposition against an 
offer to surrender a patent 
Three months from the date Of 
publication of offer 
Rule 87(2) 
43. Notice of Opposition against 
application for post-grant 
amendment 
Three months from the date of 
publication of such application 
Rule 81(3)(b) 
44. Furnishing information relating 
to working of patent in respect 
of the calendar year 
Three months from the end of 
each calendar year 
Section 
146(2), 
Rule 131 (2) 
45. Furnishing information relating 
to working of patent, upon                                                                            
notice of Controller 
Two months from the date of notice Section 146(1)
